National Planning Policy Framework
Plan-making and national decision-making policies


August 2026
© Crown copyright 2026

Copyright in the typographical arrangement rests with the Crown.

You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or
medium, under the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence visit
http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3/

This document/publication is also available on our website at www.gov.uk/mhclg

If you have any enquiries regarding this document/publication, use our
webform or write to us at:

Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government
Fry Building
2 Marsham Street
London
SW1P 4DF
Telephone: 030 3444 0000

For all our latest news and updates follow us on X: http://x.com/mhclg
Contents
1.    Introduction ........................................................................................................................3

Procedural policies

2.    Plan-making policies (PM1 - 17) .......................................................................................6

3.    Decision-making policies (DM1 - 10) ..............................................................................18

Sustainable development

4.    Achieving sustainable development (S1 - 6) ..................................................................23

5.    Meeting the challenge of climate change (CC1 - 3) .......................................................28

Delivering homes and supporting growth

6.    Delivering a sufficient supply of homes (HO1 - 13) ........................................................31

7.    Building a strong, effective economy (E1 - 4) .................................................................40

8.    Ensuring the vitality of town centres (TC1 - 4)................................................................43

9.    Supporting high quality communications (CO1 - 2) ........................................................46

10. Securing clean energy and water (W1 - 4) .....................................................................48

11. Facilitating the sustainable use of minerals (M1 - 6) ......................................................50

Creating high quality, sustainable places

12. Making effective use of land (L1 - 3) ...............................................................................55

13. Protecting Green Belt land (GB1 - 8) ..............................................................................59

14. Achieving well-designed places (DP1 - 4) ......................................................................65

15. Promoting sustainable transport (TR1 - 8)......................................................................68

16. Promoting healthy communities (HC1 - 8) ......................................................................74

17. Pollution, public protection and security (P1 - 6) ............................................................78

Conserving and enhancing the environment

18. Managing flood risk and coastal change (F1 - 9) ...........................................................83

19. Conserving and enhancing the natural environment (N1 - 6) ........................................88

20. Conserving and enhancing the historic environment (HE1 - 10) ...................................93
Annexes

Annex A: Implementation........................................................................................................99

Annex B: Glossary ............................................................................................................... 102

Annex C: Information requirements ..................................................................................... 116

Annex D: Housing calculations and supply ......................................................................... 118

Annex E: Green Belt assessments ...................................................................................... 121

Annex F: Managing flood risk and coastal change ............................................................. 124
1. Introduction
1. The National Planning Policy Framework sets out the government’s policies for plan-
   making and for making decisions on development proposals in England. It is a material
   consideration of critical importance in both contexts. This version replaces the previous
   National Planning Policy Framework published in December 2024.

2. The planning system should be genuinely plan-led. Preparing and maintaining up-to-date
   development plans should be seen as a priority for providing housing and other
   development in a sustainable manner. The plan-making policies in the Framework must
   be taken into account in preparing any part of the development plan.

3. Planning law requires that applications for planning permission be determined in
   accordance with the development plan, unless material considerations indicate
   otherwise1. The national decision-making policies in this Framework are a material
   consideration in making these decisions and should be read alongside the policies in the
   development plan. Planning decisions must also reflect relevant international obligations
   and statutory requirements, as must the preparation of development plans2.

4. This chapter explains the role of the Framework, practical points on its structure and use,
   and an overview of the purpose of the planning system. The chapter does not contain
   substantive policy; the policies to be used for plan-making and decision-making are set
   out in the chapters that follow.

Using the Framework
5. Chapters 2 and 3 set out general procedural policies for plan-making and decision-
   making. The subsequent chapters contain policies on thematic issues, separated in each
   case into policies for plan-making and those for decision-making. Taken together, the
   policies for decision-making (both procedural and thematic) comprise a set of national
   decision-making policies.

6. The plan-making policies should be read as a whole (including relevant footnotes and
   annexes), and applied in a way that is appropriate to the type of plan being produced, the
   area that it covers and the period it is intended to cover. Reflecting this, some of the plan-
   making policies indicate actions that should be taken at the most appropriate level, which
   recognises that plan-making arrangements will vary across the country (for example in
   the geographic scale of spatial development strategies and local plans). Where policies
   relate to matters that are primarily local in scale, and/or are concerned with detailed
   implementation, they will not generally apply to spatial development strategies. The
   relevant legislation does not allow spatial development strategies to allocate specific sites
   or designate specific areas of land.

7. The national decision-making policies should also be read as a whole (including relevant
   footnotes and annexes). Some of these policies indicate how much weight the

1 Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 (Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act

2004) and section 70(2) of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (Town and Country Planning Act 1990).
2 The National Planning Policy Framework does not displace the statutory obligations placed on decision-

makers by virtue of, among other things, section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004,
sections 66 and 72 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990, section 85(A1) of the
Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000 and section 11(1A) of the National Parks Act 1949.
                                                                                                               3
   government would expect a particular consideration to be given, including cases where it
   is appropriate to give substantial weight to certain benefits, and the limited circumstances
   in which it is expected that permission would be refused.

8. The thematic chapters contain both plan-making policies and national decision-making
   policies so that the approach to particular topics can be seen in the round. However, the
   plan-making policies should not be used when making decisions on development
   proposals.

9. The annexes included with this Framework are also national planning policy.

10. Short objectives are included in boxed text at the start of chapters for context only and
    should not be applied as either plan-making or decision-making policy.

11. Where policies in this Framework set out lists in the form of sub-paragraphs, all of those
    sub-paragraphs apply unless the text indicates otherwise (such as through the use of ‘or’
    at the end of one or more sub-paragraphs).

Other policy and guidance
12. There are other national policy statements which must be considered, where relevant,
    when preparing plans or making decisions on development proposals. These include the
    government’s National Planning Policy for Waste and relevant Written Ministerial
    Statements. Details of Written Ministerial Statements and other planning policy
    documents which have been incorporated into the Framework, or which no longer
    represent up-to-date government policy, are included at Annex A.

13. The Framework does not contain specific policies for nationally significant infrastructure
    projects. These are determined in accordance with the Planning Act 2008 (as amended)
    and relevant national policy statements for major infrastructure, as well as any other
    matters that are relevant (which may include this Framework). National policy statements
    may, where relevant, be a material consideration in preparing plans and making decisions
    on planning applications.

14. National planning policy is supported by a suite of planning practice guidance, the
    purpose of which is to support the implementation of national planning policy. The
    government intends this to play an important but supporting role to national planning
    policy and its status should be regarded in that light.

Purpose of the planning system
15. The purpose of the planning system is to contribute to the achievement of sustainable
    development, by managing the use and development of land in the long-term public
    interest.

16. At a very high level, the objective of sustainable development can be summarised as
    meeting the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to
    meet their own needs3. At a similarly high level, members of the United Nations –
    including the United Kingdom – have agreed to pursue the 17 Global Goals for

3 Resolution 42/187 of the United Nations General Assembly.

                                                                                                 4
   Sustainable Development in the period to 2030. These address social progress,
   economic well-being and environmental protection4.

17. Achieving sustainable development means that the planning system has three
    overarching objectives in providing for the homes, commercial development, facilities and
    infrastructure which society needs. These objectives are interdependent and need to be
    pursued in mutually supportive ways (so that opportunities can be taken to secure net
    gains across all three):

   a. An economic objective – to help build a strong, responsive and competitive
      economy, by ensuring that sufficient land of the right types is available in the right
      places and at the right time to support growth, innovation and improved productivity;
      and by identifying and coordinating the provision of infrastructure;

   b. A social objective – to support strong, vibrant and healthy communities, by ensuring
      that a sufficient number and range of homes can be provided to meet the needs of
      present and future generations; and by fostering well-designed, beautiful and safe
      places, with accessible community facilities, public service infrastructure and open
      spaces that reflect current and future needs and support communities’ health, social
      and cultural well-being; and

   c. An environmental objective – to support efforts to mitigate and adapt to climate
      change, including moving to a low carbon economy; and to protect and enhance our
      natural, built and historic environment, including making effective use of land,
      improving biodiversity, using natural resources prudently, and minimising waste and
      pollution.

18. These objectives should be delivered through the preparation and implementation of
    development plans and the application of the policies in this Framework; they are not
    criteria against which every development proposal can or should be judged. Development
    plans and decisions should play an active role in guiding development towards
    sustainable solutions, but in doing so should take local circumstances into account, to
    reflect the character, needs and opportunities of each area.




4 Transforming our World: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, published in: Transforming our world:

the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development | Department of Economic and Social Affairs.
                                                                                                               5
2. Plan-making policies
 The objective of the policies in this chapter is to create a system that is genuinely plan-led,
 through plan-making authorities5 prioritising the preparation and updating of the plans for
 which they are responsible. The preparation of development plans allows people to
 influence development in their area, including directing growth to the most appropriate and
 sustainable locations, mitigating and adapting to climate change, supporting regeneration
 and conserving and enhancing the quality of the built and natural environment.

1. The required parts of the development plan are:

    a. A spatial development strategy, produced by strategic planning authorities and the
       Mayor of London;

    b. A local plan produced by a local planning authority;

    c. A minerals and waste plan produced by a minerals and waste planning authority; and

    d. A policies map, prepared and maintained by a local planning authority, illustrating
       policies across all parts of the development plan area.

2. It may additionally include:

    a. Supplementary plans, produced by local planning authorities, minerals and waste
       planning authorities and the Mayor of London; and

    b. Neighbourhood plans, produced by parish councils and neighbourhood forums.

3. The different parts of the development plan each have a discrete purpose and are
   expected to deal positively with particular issues, as set out in the relevant legislation and
   national policies, including the policies in this Framework.

The plan-making framework
PM1: Spatial development strategies

1. Spatial development strategies should set a positive vision for future growth and change
   at a sub-regional scale and provide a clear spatial framework for investment and growth,
   including for new housing. Their content should be genuinely strategic in nature and allow
   for more detailed issues to be considered and addressed through other parts of the
   development plan.

2. They should do this by:

    a. Setting out a strategy for a sustainable pattern of growth covering a period of at least

5 For the purposes of the policies in this chapter, plan-making authorities are defined as: strategic planning

authorities; The Mayor of London; minerals and waste planning authorities; and local planning authorities. ‘Plan-
makers’ includes all plan-making authorities and any other body with the power to make a plan that will form
part of the statutory development plan.
                                                                                                                 6
        25 years, including through the apportionment to local planning authorities in the
        strategy area of objectively assessed needs for housing and other uses that are best
        considered at a strategic scale for the duration of the plan period;

    b. Identifying broad locations for growth and regeneration, including new settlements,
       major urban extensions, major cross-boundary development and other key locations
       with the potential for significant new homes, jobs and other development; such broad
       locations should extend over any strategic site allocations in adopted6 local plans;

    c. Supporting economic growth by providing a spatial framework for strategic
       investments and giving spatial expression to strategic elements of Local Growth Plans
       and the Industrial Strategy7;

    d. Identifying the general extent of areas established as Green Belt and broad locations
       where changes to Green Belt boundaries may need to be considered through local
       plan preparation, if necessary to meet the development needs of the strategy area;

    e. Identifying broad locations for nature conservation and habitat enhancement,
       restoration and creation; and addressing strategic issues relating to the protection and
       enhancement of the historic environment;

    f. Setting out the type, extent and broad location of strategic infrastructure needed to
       enable development and serve existing communities, including transport, social
       infrastructure, waste infrastructure, utilities provision (including renewable and low
       carbon energy, electricity network, telecommunications and water and wastewater
       infrastructure) and flood risk management schemes. The spatial development strategy
       should also make provision for infrastructure that is committed to in the 10 Year
       Infrastructure Strategy, sectoral spatial plans and any planned strategic infrastructure
       identified in local transport plans;

    g. Using appropriate maps and diagrams to illustrate and communicate the strategy;

    h. Providing a proportionate level of information on the mechanisms for delivering the
       strategy; and

    i. Monitoring its implementation, and commencing preparation of a replacement or
       altered version no later than seven years after the current version was adopted, or
       earlier:

        i. If a strategic planning authority (or, where applicable, the Mayor of London)
           considers that the spatial development strategy is substantially inconsistent with
           current national policies; or

        ii. Where changes to infrastructure are planned that are likely to have a significant
            impact on development and land use in the strategy area and which were not
            considered during the preparation of the existing spatial development strategy; or

        iii. To respond to new evidence demonstrating significant changes in housing or other
             needs, opportunities or development constraints.

6 Reference to the ‘adoption’ of a plan in this chapter also applies to where a plan has been ‘approved’ by the

Secretary of State.
7 The UK’s Modern Industrial Strategy published in: Industrial Strategy - GOV.UK.

                                                                                                                  7
3. The Secretary of State has powers to intervene in spatial development strategies,
   including when a strategic planning authority fails to make adequate progress with plan-
   making.

PM2: Local plans

1. Local plans should set out a positive vision and spatial strategy which supports the
   delivery of the spatial development strategy for their area, and should set out specific
   proposals for accommodating development needs and conserving and improving the
   environment at a local level. They should do this by:

    a. Setting out a vision for the plan area, supported by no more than ten measurable
       outcomes, which:

        i. Articulates how the area should change over the plan period;

        ii. Sets aspirational aims and objectives underpinned by a realistic appreciation of
            what the plan’s policies can genuinely shape and deliver;

        iii. Reflects longer term expectations extending beyond the plan period where
             appropriate, including for any broad locations for growth and regeneration identified
             in the spatial development strategy, and any specific strategic site proposals; and

        iv. Has particular regard to meeting the identified development needs of the area in a
            sustainable manner in accordance with policy S1.

    b. Setting out a spatial strategy, policies for the minimum amount of development to be
       provided, land allocations8 and broad locations for growth, and designations in
       accordance with policy S2, for a period of no less than 10 years from the point of
       adoption of the plan. Local plans can cover a longer time period where this would, for
       example, help support the delivery of longer-term infrastructure or strategic
       development;

    c. Identifying the contributions expected from development towards meeting affordable
       housing requirements and on-and off-site infrastructure necessary to support delivery
       of the plan in accordance with policy PM12; and

    d. Including other policies, accompanied by concise explanatory text as necessary to aid
       interpretation, only where these support the delivery of specific allocated sites (to set
       clear expectations of what is required in terms of layout, infrastructure and design); or
       where these address particular local issues in accordance with policy PM6.

2. Local plans should be prepared and adopted within 30 months of publishing a Gateway 1
   self-assessment9.


8 Allocations should identify any site-specific expectations and requirements, including for on-and off-site

infrastructure, and should include: a site reference, name and area; a short description of existing and allocated
use(s); an indicative or specific site capacity for the development proposed; and the projected delivery
timeframe.
9 Further information on the role of gateways in the preparation of local plans is published in: Create or update a

local plan using the new system - GOV.UK.
                                                                                                                  8
3. Preparation of the next local plan must be commenced no later than five years after
   adoption of the current plan10, but should be prepared earlier where:

    a. An Inspector at examination of the current local plan has made a recommendation to
       prepare a new plan earlier; or

    b. There has been a significant change in local circumstances, including where an area’s
       housing requirement has significantly increased following the adoption of a spatial
       development strategy.

4. The Secretary of State has powers to intervene in plans, including when a local planning
   authority fails to make adequate progress with plan-making.

5. Joint local plans prepared by two or more local planning authorities can be considered
   where this would enable local planning matters to be dealt with most effectively.

PM3: Minerals and waste plans

1. Minerals and waste plans should set out specific proposals to facilitate a sufficient supply
   of minerals to meet society’s needs and enable the delivery of sustainable waste
   management and a circular economy. Their preparation should accord with policy PM2,
   other than in relation to identifying contributions to affordable housing.

2. Minerals and waste matters can be dealt with in separate plans or combined with local
   plans where an authority is responsible for all these matters. Minerals and waste planning
   authorities should consider the most appropriate form for their minerals and waste plan to
   take.

3. Joint minerals and waste plans prepared by two or more minerals and waste planning
   authorities can be considered where this would enable matters related to minerals and
   waste planning to be dealt with most effectively.

PM4: Supplementary plans

1. Supplementary plans may be used by relevant plan-making authorities11 to address
   specific issues, where these are not already covered in other parts of the development
   plan for the area or the policies in this Framework. They should be limited to:

    a. Setting out locally-specific design standards to provide clear design expectations that
       support the delivery of development; or

    b. Situations where a supplementary plan would allow the authority to respond positively
       and quickly to unanticipated changes in their area, between plan-making cycles,
       where it is important to put in place policies to shape and direct development for a site
       or group of sites which the authority considers to be nearby to each other.

2. Supplementary plans should not be used to subvert the role of local plans and minerals
   and waste plans, including the vision or spatial strategy set out within them. Their


10 Preparation of a new plan begins for these purposes when the authority publishes a Gateway 1 self-

assessment summary.
11 Local planning authorities, minerals and waste planning authorities and the Mayor of London.

                                                                                                        9
    preparation should not be used to delay the implementation of sites allocated for
    development in those plans.

3. Where supplementary plans allocate sites for development, these allocations should be
   included in the next local plan (or minerals and waste plan) for the area, unless changes
   in circumstances mean that it is no longer relevant to do so 12.

PM5: Neighbourhood plans

1. Neighbourhood plans allow local communities to plan positively for their areas by
   identifying and addressing community priorities that can be met or supported through the
   planning system. They should do this by:

    a. Allocating land to meet the development needs of their designated area, where it is
       appropriate to do so; and

    b. Setting out policies which address particular local issues. These should relate to site-
       specific matters or, where appropriate, may cover wider issues such as the provision
       of infrastructure and community facilities, regeneration opportunities, design
       requirements (including design codes), local environmental improvements and the
       conservation of local heritage assets.

2. The contents of a neighbourhood plan should not result in less development than
   specified in other parts of the development plan which cover the same area.

Preparing plans
PM6: General principles for plan-making

1. All plan-makers should, in preparing plans:

    a. Only address matters, and include policies, that are necessary and relevant to the plan
       being prepared, and that avoid unnecessary duplication of other parts of the
       development plan;

    b. Only include policies that extend beyond site or location-specific requirements where
       these are necessary and where plan-makers consider there is a clear and justified
       reason for inclusion;

    c. Not include policies which duplicate, substantively restate or are inconsistent with the
       content of national decision-making policies, unless directed by other policies in this
       Framework;

    d. Engage positively with communities and other key stakeholders, at appropriate points
       during their preparation and using a range of methods, so that relevant issues are
       identified and addressed as early as possible during the plan-making process;



12 To ensure the process of including relevant policies from supplementary plans in the next local plan (or

minerals and waste plan) is effective, local authorities should, when preparing supplementary plans, have
regard to the requirements and expectations set out for the local plans and minerals and waste plans
preparation process.
                                                                                                              10
    e. Use environmental assessment to inform the preparation of plans, where legally
       required13;

   f. Make use of relevant online tools, methods, and templates published by the Secretary
      of State, and consider the use of other digital planning software and resources as
      appropriate to the type of plan being prepared14; and

   g. Publish plans in a searchable digital format (e.g. as a text-based webpage), which
      complies with defined data standards (where applicable), to ensure plans are easily
      navigable and accessible to different users.

PM7: Initiating plan-making for local plans and minerals and waste plans

1. Prior to initiating the preparation of a local plan or minerals and waste plan, planning
   authorities should, with reference to national guidance15, design an approach to preparing
   and adopting the plan within 30 months. This should involve:

   a. Setting realistic timings for key milestones and reflecting these in the local plan or
      minerals and waste plan timetable, which thereafter must be updated at prescribed
      points;

   b. Identifying how the plan and associated documents will be signed off expediently and
      efficiently at appropriate points in its development;

   c. Using a project initiation document to develop and collate key information about how
      the plan will be resourced, managed and consulted on throughout its preparation; and

   d. Planning regular engagement with key stakeholders who are likely to be critical to the
      delivery of the plan.

2. When considering the scope of a local plan or minerals and waste plan, planning
   authorities should use their four-year plan evaluation report (or other relevant monitoring
   information, where necessary) to identify and consider what preexisting plan policies and
   content should be wholly replaced, amended or carried forward without change, though all
   elements will be subject to consultation and examination.

PM8: Evidence for plan-making

1. All plans should be informed by a baseline understanding of the needs, opportunities,
   constraints and wider context of the area to which they relate. The preparation of plans
   should then be shaped and underpinned by information and data that is: relevant to the
   matters being considered in the plan; proportionate, so that it is focused and not
   unnecessarily extensive; and drawn from suitable and reliable sources that are sufficiently
   up-to-date.



13 Neighbourhood plans may require Strategic Environmental Assessment, but only where there are potentially

significant environmental effects.
14 For further details see: Create or update a local plan using the new system - GOV.UK and the Planning Data

Platform.
15 Relevant tools and templates are published in: Create or update a local plan using the new system -

GOV.UK.
                                                                                                           11
2. To achieve this, plan-makers should:

    a. Draw upon existing evidence, and update this where appropriate, before preparing or
       commissioning wholly new evidence (which should be done only where necessary);

    b. Consider using relevant evidence produced by other plan-makers, where doing so
       could avoid duplication and support alignment between plans, local strategies and
       priorities;

    c. Work jointly with neighbouring or other relevant plan-makers to prepare evidence,
       particularly relating to cross-boundary matters, where joint working could increase
       resource efficiency and/or support a more strategic approach and improved
       cooperation; and

    d. Not prepare new or additional evidence after a plan has been submitted for
       examination, unless requested to do so by an appointed Inspector or examiner.

3. Evidence related to development needs should be produced using sufficiently up-to-date
   information and data. Where evidence on development needs has been established at an
   early stage of plan preparation, it should not require reviewing and updating unless there
   are strong reasons to do so.

PM9: Identifying and assessing land for development

1. Development plans should be informed by an assessment of the land available in their
   area to meet development needs. For spatial development strategies, this can be a
   strategic level assessment of land availability and development capacity to support the
   identification of broad locations.

2. For plans that allocate specific sites for development, the assessment should be
   undertaken with reference to national guidance where applicable16, and be proportionate
   to the type of plan being prepared. The assessment should include:

    a. A thorough site identification process to identify a sufficient range and quantity of
       potential sites;

    b. An assessment of the availability, suitability and achievability (including likely viability)
       of those sites;

    c. An assessment of the amount of development those sites have the potential to
       accommodate and the potential timescales over which development could be
       delivered17; and

    d. The identification of appropriate sites for development, taking into account the
       emerging vision and spatial strategy of the plan and the information requirements set
       out in this policy.


16 Relevant tools and templates are published in: Create or update a local plan using the new system -

GOV.UK.
17 Taking into account the policies in this Framework, associated infrastructure requirements and their potential

to be addressed, and the impact of any relevant environmental plans or strategies (including Environmental
Delivery Plans).
                                                                                                               12
PM10: Maintaining cooperation between plan-making authorities

1. Plan-making authorities should engage proactively and regularly with infrastructure
   providers, neighbouring and other relevant plan-making authorities (where there are
   strategic interdependencies across boundaries) and other relevant bodies to identify and
   address cross-boundary matters that need to be addressed in their plans, including:

    a. Where additional infrastructure (or additional capacity from existing infrastructure) is
       needed;

    b. Where development needs that cannot be met wholly within a particular plan area
       could be met elsewhere; and

    c. To determine optimal locations for growth, such as in connected places for housing or
       along major transport corridors for some types of employment (which may necessitate
       alignment between different strategic planning authorities18).

2. Plan-making authorities should ensure their plan policies align as fully as possible with
   those of other bodies where there are strategic interdependencies across boundaries,
   including neighbouring and other relevant nearby plan-making authorities. In doing so
   they should take into account the relevant infrastructure and investment plans of
   infrastructure providers and authorities.

3. Where matters are already addressed by an adopted spatial development strategy, plan-
   making authorities within the strategy area do not need to revisit them when preparing
   their plans.

4. Where there is uncertainty about the future direction of other parts of the development
   plan or the plans of infrastructure providers, such as due to misaligned timings, plan-
   making authorities should make pragmatic decisions on the basis of available information
   rather than waiting for a full set of evidence from other bodies.

PM11: Demonstrating cooperation between plan-making authorities

1. Plan-making authorities should prepare, maintain and publish one or more statements of
   common ground to demonstrate that relevant cross-boundary matters have been
   addressed where possible, including by:

    a. Taking a consistent approach to planning the delivery of major infrastructure where
       this involves one or more neighbouring authorities;

    b. Distributing and providing for unmet needs across neighbouring and/or nearby areas;
       and

    c. Planning effectively for cross-boundary growth locations, allocations or designations
       with significant implications across neighbouring areas.

2. Where it has not been possible to fully address cross-boundary matters, plan-making
   authorities should demonstrate that they have taken all reasonable steps to address

18 This also applies to the Mayor of London.

                                                                                                  13
   them.

PM12: Developer contributions

1. Development plans should, at the most appropriate level, set out the contributions
   expected from development to support the delivery of the plan.

2. These policy requirements may apply to different areas covered by the plan. This
   includes:

   a. Plan-wide policies;

   b. Site-specific policies; and

   c. Policies for different types or location of site or types of development.

3. Policy requirements should:

   a. Include the levels and types of affordable housing provision required (with reference to
      policy HO5), along with other infrastructure required;

   b. Be set at a level that allows for the planned types of development and sites to be
      deliverable, maximising certainty and reducing the need for viability assessment at the
      decision-making stage; and

   c. Be clear so that they can be accurately accounted for in the price paid for land. To
      provide this certainty, affordable housing requirements should be expressed as a
      single figure rather than a range.

4. Plans should set out the circumstances in which review mechanisms will be used for
   development proposals where contributions are proposed to be reduced below the
   requirements set out in plan policies, in accordance with planning practice guidance.
   Plans should clearly set out the processes and terms of engagement regarding how and
   when viability will be reassessed over the lifetime of the development to maximise policy
   compliance.

PM13: Setting standards

1. Quantitative standards set through development plan policies for infrastructure provision,
   affordable housing requirements, parking, density, and design and placemaking should
   provide clarity and a high degree of certainty about the requirements that relevant
   development proposals are expected to meet. Such standards should:

   a. Be justified, drawing upon relevant evidence of local characteristics and needs, while
      utilising or adapting relevant national standards where it is appropriate to do so (such
      as in relation to green infrastructure). Evidence in support of standards should be
      proportionate, in accordance with policy PM8, especially where relevant national
      standards already exist; and

   b. Not cover matters that are already addressed by Building Regulations, other than in
      relation to:


                                                                                             14
        i. Accessibility standards, for which local standards in relation to requirement M4(2)
           (accessible and adaptable dwellings) and/or M4(3) (wheelchair user dwellings) of
           the Building Regulations should be set in accordance with policy HO5; or

        ii. Water efficiency, for which it may be appropriate to apply the tighter Building
            Regulations optional requirement where justified, or exceptionally a more stringent
            local standard in areas of serious water stress; or

        iii. Energy efficiency, for which any standards that go beyond the current or proposed
             Building Regulations should have a clear and robustly costed rationale which
             shows that there will not be an adverse impact on the viability and deliverability of
             development. Any such standards should be expressed as a percentage uplift of a
             dwelling’s Target Emissions Rate (TER) calculated using a specified version of the
             Standard Assessment Procedure (SAP) or other approved calculation
             methodology.

2. Quantitative standards should not cover other matters, or relate solely to the internal
   layout of buildings, unless:

    a. They are to implement the nationally described space standard; or

    b. They have a clear and robustly costed rationale, are proportionate and will not have
       an adverse impact on the viability and deliverability of development.

Examining Plans
PM14: Examining spatial development strategies

1. Spatial development strategies are subject to an independent examination19 by an
   examiner appointed by the Secretary of State. The purpose of the examination should be
   to assess whether relevant procedural requirements have been met, and the strategy is
   ‘sound’ alongside any other matters the examiner considers to be appropriate. Where the
   examiner does not consider the spatial development strategy to be sound, the examiner
   will be able to suggest modifications for the strategic planning authority to consider or
   recommend that the strategy is withdrawn.

2. A sound spatial development strategy should satisfy the following tests:

    a. Positive – the strategy sets out a positive approach to delivering growth which, as a
       minimum, seeks to meet the area’s objectively assessed needs, and is based on
       effective joint working on cross-boundary strategic matters. A strategy which does not
       provide for objectively assessed needs should be considered an exception, and only
       where it is evidenced that stringent efforts have been taken to meet those needs
       through cooperation with other strategic planning authorities20;

    b. Appropriate – the strategy sets out an appropriate strategy to enable the delivery of
       sustainable development, taking into account reasonable alternatives, the 10 Year
       Infrastructure Plan, the Industrial Strategy, any relevant Local Growth Plan and other
       relevant strategies;

19 Unless otherwise directed by the Secretary of State.
20 This also applies to the Mayor of London.

                                                                                                15
    c. Effective – the strategy sets out effective policies for development and there is a
       reasonable prospect that local plans will be capable of identifying site allocations to
       implement its spatial strategy. Where spatial development strategies anticipate a
       change in market conditions which the strategy itself is intended to foster, a
       proportionate approach should be taken in assessing assumptions for the longer term,
       given the uncertainty which is likely to surround them. Post-adoption monitoring should
       be undertaken in such circumstances; and

    d. Consistent with national policy – the strategy accords with the policies for plan-
       making in this Framework and other statements of national planning policy, where
       relevant, and does not include policies which duplicate, substantively restate or are
       inconsistent with the content of national policies for decision-making.

3. These tests should be applied in a proportionate way. When examining a spatial
   development strategy there may be limited certainty about the delivery of infrastructure
   towards the end of the plan period. Where this is the case, it will be sufficient to assess
   whether reasonable assumptions have been made based on adequate engagement with
   the relevant infrastructure providers.

PM15: Examining local plans and minerals and waste plans

1. Local plans and minerals and waste plans are subject to an independent examination by
   an inspector (or panel of inspectors) appointed by the Secretary of State. The purpose of
   the examination is to assess whether the plan is ‘sound’. A sound plan should satisfy the
   following tests:

    a. Positive – the plan sets out a positive approach to delivering growth to meet the
       development needs of the area in accordance with policy S1, and is based on effective
       joint working on cross-boundary strategic matters;

    b. Appropriate – the plan sets out an appropriate strategy to enable the delivery of
       sustainable development, taking into account reasonable alternatives, and is based on
       proportionate evidence;

    c. Effective – the plan sets out effective policies for development, and there is a
       reasonable prospect that its site allocations are capable of being deliverable at the
       time envisioned;

    d. Consistent with national policy – the plan accords with the policies for plan-making
       in this Framework and other statements of national planning policy where relevant,
       and does not include policies which duplicate, substantively restate or are inconsistent
       with the content of national policies for decision-making; and

    e. Conformity – the plan is in general conformity with any adopted spatial development
       strategy for the area21.

2. The tests of soundness should be applied in a proportionate way, taking into account the
   type and purpose of policy being considered.

21 Conformity with an emerging spatial development strategy should also be taken into consideration. The

extent to which conformity with an emerging strategy should be considered will depend on the stage of
preparation of the emerging strategy and whether or not there is an existing strategy relating to the area.
                                                                                                              16
PM16: Examining supplementary plans

1. Supplementary plans are subject to a streamlined preparation, consultation and
   examination process. The purpose of the examination of supplementary plans is to
   determine whether:

   a. The relevant legal requirements have been met including, where a supplementary plan
      allocates multiple sites, that the local authority has reached a reasonable conclusion
      that the sites involved are nearby to each other; and

   b. The relevant plan-making authority has had regard to national policies and guidance
      issued by the Secretary of State, which includes policy PM6(1)(c) in this Framework
      that development plans should not include policies which duplicate, substantively
      restate or are inconsistent with the content of national policies for decision-making.

PM17: Examining neighbourhood plans

1. Neighbourhood plans must meet certain ‘basic conditions’ and other legal requirements
   before they can come into force. These are tested through an independent examination
   before the neighbourhood plan may proceed to referendum.

2. The basic conditions include consideration of whether, having regard to national policies
   and advice contained in guidance issued by the Secretary of State (which includes policy
   PM6(1)(c) in this Framework that development plans should not include policies which
   duplicate, substantively restate or are inconsistent with the content of national policies for
   decision-making), it is appropriate for the neighbourhood plan to be ‘made’.




                                                                                               17
3. Decision-making policies
 The objective of the policies in this chapter is to ensure that development proposals are
 informed by appropriate information and decided in a way which is proportionate, timely
 and effective. This chapter provides a set of general decision-making policies which should
 be read with the rest of the thematic policies in the other chapters.

Preparing planning proposals
DM1: Preparing development proposals

1. Proposals for major development should:

   a. Be informed by early engagement with neighbours and the local community, as well
      as with the local planning authority, statutory consultees, infrastructure providers,
      registered providers of social housing and other relevant bodies where appropriate, to
      identify and seek to resolve key planning matters prior to the submission of a planning
      application. This pre-application engagement should be proportionate to the nature of
      the proposal and those likely to be affected by it; and

   b. Be accompanied by a concise planning statement setting out:

       i. How the development proposal is consistent with relevant development plan and
          national decision-making policies;

       ii. The outcome of pre-application engagement and the extent to which the proposal
           has changed in response to this engagement; and

       iii. The proposed use of any planning obligations to make the proposal acceptable in
            planning terms.

2. Proposals for other types of development should be supported by the minimum necessary
   information requirements to enable a decision. In certain circumstances, set out
   elsewhere in this Framework, this should include pre-application discussions (see policies
   CO2 and P4). Pre-application engagement may also be required where proposals raise
   complex planning matters, such as the potential effect on heritage assets.

DM2: Information requirements

1. To ensure a clear and consistent approach to the information required to determine
   development proposals, local validation lists setting out the information required in
   support of an application for development should include the information specified in the
   relevant national decision-making policies (summarised in Annex C).

2. Local validation lists should only include additional information requirements if there is a
   policy in the development plan requiring a specific further assessment. Any such
   additional information requirements should not be applied equally to all applications but
   should be proportionate to the scale of development and its potential impact. Where
   appropriate, the requirements should clearly distinguish between what is required for
   major, medium and other types of development proposal.

                                                                                                  18
Determining development proposals
DM3: Determining development proposals

1. When considering development proposals, local planning authorities should:

   a. Work with the applicant in a positive and proactive manner, where necessary seeking
      solutions to problems arising from initial proposals, to enable a timely decision;

   b. Take a proportionate approach to the consideration of the planning matters raised by
      the proposals, in a way that reflects their scale, complexity and potential impact;

   c. Take account of planning matters raised during any pre-application engagement,
      including any positive responses to this engagement, as well as representations on
      the proposals;

   d. Consult statutory or internal consultees only where it is necessary to do so. Decisions
      on development proposals should not be delayed in order to secure advice from a
      statutory or internal consultee beyond their statutory deadlines unless there is
      insufficient information to make the decision, there are public safety risks from
      proceeding without advice, or more detailed advice may enable an approval rather
      than a refusal;

   e. Consider whether otherwise unacceptable development proposals could be made
      acceptable through the use of planning conditions or planning obligations; and

   f. Not refuse applications for development which should clearly be approved, having
      regard to their accordance with the development plan, the policies in this Framework
      and any other material considerations.

DM4: Emerging development plan proposals

1. When preparing and considering development proposals, relevant policies in emerging
   development plans may be given weight according to:

   a. The stage of preparation of the emerging plan (the more advanced its preparation, the
      greater the weight that may be given);

   b. The extent to which there are unresolved objections to relevant policies (the less
      significant the unresolved objections, the greater the weight that may be given); and

   c. The degree of compliance of the relevant policies in the emerging plan with the
      policies for plan-making in this Framework (the closer the policies in the emerging plan
      to the policies in this Framework, the greater the weight that may be given to them).

2. Development proposals should not be refused on the grounds of being premature, other
   than in the limited circumstances where both:

   a. The development proposal is so substantial, or its cumulative effect alongside other
      development proposals would be so significant, that to grant permission would
      undermine the plan-making process by predetermining decisions about the scale,
      location or phasing of new development that are central to an emerging plan; and
                                                                                              19
     b. The emerging plan is at an advanced stage but is not yet formally part of the
        development plan for the area. An emerging plan is unlikely to be in an advanced
        stage if a draft spatial development strategy, local plan, minerals and waste plan or
        supplementary plan has yet to be submitted for examination; or, in the case of a
        neighbourhood plan, the local planning authority publicity period on the draft plan has
        not ended.

3. Where planning permission is refused on grounds of prematurity, the reason for the
   refusal should indicate clearly how granting permission for the development proposal
   would prejudice the outcome of the plan-making process.

DM5: Development viability

1. Where development proposals accord with relevant up-to-date plan policies and national
   decision-making policies, they should be assumed to be viable. Relevant policies in this
   context are those that relate to the contributions expected from development.

2. There may be circumstances in which a viability assessment demonstrates that it would
   not be possible for development to proceed on a policy compliant basis. In such
   circumstances, the submission of a viability assessment as part of a development
   proposal may be justified to ensure that the proposed development makes the maximum
   possible contribution to affordable housing and other infrastructure. Such circumstances
   may include where:

     a. The development proposed is materially different to any development type considered
        in the viability assessment that informed the development plan;

     b. The site characteristics are materially different to those considered in the viability
        assessment that informed the development plan;

     c. The development is demonstrably burdened by costs which were not taken into
        account in the viability assessment that informed the development plan; and/or

     d. Site or economic circumstances have changed significantly22 since the viability
        assessment that informed the development plan was prepared.

3. Neither the price paid for land, nor the price intended to be paid through an option
   agreement, should be a justification for failing to accord with relevant policies in the plan.

4. Where a viability assessment is submitted with a development proposal, this should be
   based upon and refer back to the viability assessment(s) that informed the relevant
   development plan policies. It should fully evidence all inputs and assumptions used in the
   assessment, and explain any differences from those used for viability assessment that
   informed the relevant plan policies. All viability assessments should reflect the
   recommended approach in planning practice guidance, including the standardised inputs,
   and should be made publicly available.




22In the context of economic circumstances, ‘changed significantly’ would be a recession or similar
significant economic change.
                                                                                                      20
5. It is a matter for the decision-maker, having regard to the circumstances under which the
   viability assessment is submitted, to assess the weight to be given to a viability
   assessment.

DM6: Use of planning conditions and obligations

1. Planning conditions should only be attached to planning permissions and other
   associated consents for development where they are:

   a. Necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms;

   b. Relevant to the development and to planning considerations generally;

   c. Sufficiently precise to make them capable of being complied with and enforced; and

   d. Reasonable in all other respects.

2. Conditions should not be used to:

   a. Require payments of money; or

   b. Require that land is formally given up to another party (such as highways to the local
      highway authority); or

   c. Restrict national permitted development rights unless there is clear justification to do
      so.

3. Where national model conditions are relevant to the development, they should be used
   unless there are strong reasons for using a different condition. Conditions that are
   required to be discharged before development commences should be avoided, unless
   there is a clear justification. Applications to discharge conditions should be dealt with in a
   timely manner to avoid unnecessary delays to development.

4. Planning obligations should only be used where it is not possible to address potential
   unacceptable impacts through a planning condition. Where national model planning
   obligations are relevant to the development, they should be used unless there are strong
   reasons for using a different planning obligation.

DM7: Relationship with other regulatory regimes

1. Development proposals should be assessed on the basis of whether they would be an
   acceptable use of land. Matters which are controlled by separate regulatory regimes may,
   in the context of a particular development proposal, be a material consideration where
   they have land-use implications. Decision-makers should assume, unless there is clear
   evidence to the contrary, that those separate regimes will operate effectively.

2. Planning decisions should not seek to duplicate or extend controls imposed by separate
   regulatory regimes other than where there is a development plan policy in place applying
   optional technical standards for the development proposed (see policy PM13).

3. The parallel processing of planning and other regulatory consents is encouraged where
   this can help to align and expedite the consenting of development.
                                                                                                 21
4. Where compliance under a separate regulatory regime requires subsequent changes to
   an approved development proposal, such changes should be approved unless they would
   mean the development is no longer acceptable when assessed against development plan
   and national decision-making policies.

DM8: Unauthorised development and enforcement

1. Where there has been unauthorised development and local planning authorities are
   considering whether enforcement action is expedient, they should take account of their
   local enforcement plan, the impact of the breach of planning control, and the extent to
   which the breach would otherwise be acceptable.

2. In cases of unauthorised development where consideration is being given to an
   application for retrospective planning permission (or through an enforcement appeal,
   whether to grant planning permission in respect of a breach of planning control), if it is
   concluded based on evidence that the unauthorised development was intentional, that
   fact should be given substantial weight in considering whether to grant planning
   permission.

Other routes to consent
DM9: Use of development orders

1. To provide certainty about the prospects of securing planning permission for specified
   forms of development, local planning authorities and Mayors are strongly encouraged to
   use Local Development Orders and Mayoral Development Orders, especially where this
   would support housing, regeneration, economic growth or environmental improvement.
   These orders should take account of the development plan and national decision-making
   policies, and set out precisely what development is permitted and how planning
   obligations will be secured.

2. Local planning authorities should also respond positively to any proposals from
   communities for Neighbourhood Development Orders and Community Right to Build
   Orders, working collaboratively with community organisations to resolve any issues
   before draft orders are submitted for examination.

DM10: Removal of national permitted development rights

1. The use of Article 4 directions to remove permitted development rights should:

   a. Be limited to situations where it is necessary to protect local amenity or the wellbeing
      of the area (for example safeguarding against the demolition of local facilities,
      preventing an over-concentration of uses which could affect the quality of life such as
      small Houses in Multiple Occupation, or supporting the vitality and viability of parts of
      town centres);

   b. Be based on robust evidence; and

   c. Apply to the smallest area required to mitigate the evidenced harm.


                                                                                                22
4. Achieving sustainable development
 The objective of the policies in this chapter is to meet development needs through
 sustainable patterns of development, including by maximising the potential for growth on
 suitable land within settlements, enabling development which will support the rural
 economy, rural communities and the provision of infrastructure, and limiting development
 away from settlements to help safeguard the intrinsic character and beauty of the
 countryside.

Plan-making policies
S1: Positive plan-making

1. The development plan should plan positively for future growth and change by:

    a. Seeking to meet the development needs of their area, as a minimum. For spatial
       development strategies, and for local plans where a spatial development strategy is
       not in place23, this means providing for objectively assessed needs for housing,
       business and other uses (including supporting infrastructure), as well as any needs
       that cannot be met within neighbouring areas, unless:

        i. The application of the policies in this Framework that protect areas or assets of
           particular importance24 provides a strong reason for restricting the overall scale,
           type or distribution of development in the plan area; or

        ii. Any adverse impacts of doing so would substantially outweigh the benefits, when
            assessed against the policies in this Framework taken as a whole.

    b. Providing for new development, and improvement of the environment, in a way that
       promotes a sustainable pattern of growth and seeks to mitigate climate change and
       adapt to its effects.

S2: Producing a spatial strategy

1. The development plan should set out a spatial strategy setting clear expectations for the
   location of development and where land should be protected or enhanced for specific
   purposes, by identifying at the most appropriate plan level:

    a. Settlements within the development plan area (applying the definition in the glossary
       at Annex B), whether existing or proposed, and their boundaries;

    b. The location and boundary of town centres within settlements, or other specific areas
       where particular approaches to development apply;



23 Where a spatial development strategy is in place, the local plan should plan for the level of development

provided for in the spatial development strategy covering the area of the local plan.
24 The policies referred to are those in this Framework (rather than those in development plans) relating to:

habitats sites and/or designated as Sites of Special Scientific Interest; land designated as Green Belt, Local Green
Space, a National Landscape, a National Park (or within the Broads Authority) or defined as Heritage Coast;
irreplaceable habitats; designated heritage assets; and areas at risk of flooding or coastal change.
                                                                                                                 23
   c. Land that is protected or proposed to be enhanced for specific purposes (such as
      habitat improvement) and which places limits on whether development proposals may
      be acceptable or where specific policies apply. Designations and associated policies
      to safeguard gaps between settlements should be used only where they are
      necessary to maintain the separate identities of the settlements and their physical
      separation, should be no larger than needed to achieve this aim, and should not apply
      to land in the Green Belt; and

   d. Sites allocated for development to meet the identified need for housing and other uses
      in the area and for local and strategic infrastructure (including any proposals to enable
      the development of land around stations).

2. The spatial strategy should be illustrated on a key diagram forming part of a spatial
   development strategy and/or local plan (or minerals and waste plan, where relevant), with
   the boundaries of specific policy areas, land-use designations and allocations identified
   on a policies map.

National decision-making policies
S3: Presumption in favour of sustainable development

1. Decisions on development proposals should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable
   development. This means:

   a. Policy S4 in this Framework should be applied when considering development
      proposals within settlements;

   b. Outside settlements, policy S5 should be applied; and

   c. In all locations, development proposals that accord with both an up-to-date
      development plan and the decision-making policies in this Framework should be
      approved without delay.

2. Where a development proposal falls partly within and partly outside a settlement, policies
   S4 and S5 should be applied to the relevant parts which are inside or outside of the
   settlement boundary (as appropriate), before coming to an overall view on the proposal.

S4: Principle of development within settlements

1. Development proposals within settlements should be approved unless the benefits of
   doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed
   against the national decision-making policies in this Framework.

2. In applying policy S4, the circumstances in which the benefits of approving development
   are likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects include (but are not restricted
   to) situations where the development proposal would:

   a. Have a substantial adverse impact in relation to:

      i. The allocation or safeguarding of land or buildings for particular uses in the
         development plan, unless there is no reasonable prospect of an application coming

                                                                                             24
             forward for the allocated use, or there is evidence that the safeguarding is no
             longer appropriate; or

        ii. The application of the policies in this Framework for existing recreational land and
            facilities (HC7), Local Green Space (HC8), areas of particular importance for
            biodiversity and geodiversity (N6), Protected Landscapes (N4) and development
            within residential curtilages (L2(1)(d)).

   b. Involve the whole or partial loss of undeveloped land which is used for a cemetery or
      burial ground; or for water storage and/or flood risk management (unless suitable
      compensatory provision is made that does not increase the risk of flooding either on or
      off-site); or

   c. Fail to comply with one of the national decision-making policies which state that
      development proposals should be refused in specific circumstances.

S5: Principle of development outside settlements

1. Only certain forms of development should be approved outside settlements, as set out in
   the following list. These should be approved, unless the benefits of doing so would be
   substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the national
   decision-making policies in this Framework:

    a. Development for: agriculture, horticulture and forestry; outdoor sport and recreation;
       allotments; cemeteries and burial grounds; mineral extraction and processing;
       engineering operations and infrastructure (including for transport, energy, water and
       telecommunications); roadside facilities in accordance with policy TR5; national
       defence and security; or which is solely for nature conservation, restoration and/or
       enhancement;

    b. Development for rural businesses and services, including tourism, where a location
       outside settlements is shown to be necessary;

    c. The reuse, extension, alteration or replacement of an existing building, provided that
       the existing building is of permanent and substantial construction, is lawful in planning
       terms, and any extension or alteration will not result in a disproportionate increase in
       size compared to the existing building25. In the case of proposals for a replacement
       building, it should be for the same use and not disproportionately larger than the one it
       replaces;

    d. The redevelopment of previously developed land (including a material change of use
       to residential or mixed-use including residential);

    e. Limited infilling within groups of houses;

    f. An exception site as provided for in policy HO10, or development brought forward
       under a Community Right to Build Order or Neighbourhood Development Order;

    g. Development which would address an evidenced unmet need for gypsy, traveller or


25 The existing building is to be assessed as the property as existing on the date of the publication of this

Framework.
                                                                                                                25
        travelling showpeople accommodation26, provided it meets the criteria in policy
        HO12;

    h. Residential and mixed-use development which would:

        i. Be within reasonable walking distance of a well-connected station (applying the
           definitions in the glossary at Annex B);

        ii. Be physically well-related to the station or the settlement within which the station is
            located;

        iii. Be of a scale which can be accommodated taking into account the existing or
             proposed availability of infrastructure; and

        iv. Not prejudice any proposals for long-term comprehensive development in the
            same location.

    i. The development of land allocated for that purpose in the development plan (where
       this lies outside settlements); and

    j. Development which would address an evidenced unmet need (including, but not
       limited to, development proposals involving the provision of housing where the local
       planning authority cannot demonstrate a five year supply of deliverable housing sites
       or scores below 75% in the most recent Housing Delivery Test27), and where the
       development would:

        i. Be physically well-related to an existing settlement28 (unless the nature of the
           development would make this inappropriate) and be of a scale which can be
           accommodated taking into account the existing or proposed availability of
           infrastructure; or

        ii. Comprise major development for freight and logistics purposes which accords with
            policy E3.

2. In applying this policy, the circumstances in which the benefits of approving development
   proposals are likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects include, but are not
   restricted to, situations where the development proposal would fail to comply with one of
   the national decision-making policies which state that development proposals should be
   refused in specific circumstances.

3. Development proposals comprising isolated homes, which are those lying outside
   settlements or groups of houses, should not be approved other than in accordance with
   policy HO11.

4. Development proposals which do not fall within one of the categories set out in this policy
   should only be approved in exceptional circumstances, where the benefits of the proposal

26 Including (but not limited to) where the relevant local planning authority cannot demonstrate a five year supply

of deliverable sites as set out in policy HO3(1)(a) or (b).
27 See Annex D: Housing calculations and supply.
28 Where a development proposal is located outside a settlement, and separated from the existing built-up area

by virtue of being beyond the outside edge of an allocated site that has yet to be fully developed, consideration
should be given to whether the proposal is in a suitable location should the allocated development not proceed.
                                                                                                                26
   would substantially outweigh the adverse effects, including to the character of the
   countryside and in relation to promoting sustainable patterns of movement.

5. This policy does not apply to development proposals in the Green Belt or on land
   designated as Local Green Space, which should instead be determined in accordance
   with policies HC8, GB6, GB7 and/or GB8 (as appropriate). However, where development
   would not be inappropriate in these locations (through the application of policies HC8 and
   GB7), proposals should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
   substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the national
   decision-making policies in this Framework, and applying paragraph 2 of this policy.

S6: Neighbourhood plans and the presumption

1. For development proposals involving the provision of housing, the benefits of approving
   development are likely to be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects where a
   proposal would conflict with a neighbourhood plan, provided the following apply:

  a. The neighbourhood plan became part of the development plan five years or less before
     the date on which the decision is made; and

  b. The neighbourhood plan contains allocations to meet its identified housing requirement
     (see policy HO2).




                                                                                             27
5. Meeting the challenge of climate change
 The objective of the policies in this chapter is to support the transition to net zero by 2050
 and to shape places in ways which are more resilient to the effects of climate change. It
 does this by setting out policies to shape places in ways that contribute to radical
 reductions in greenhouse gas emissions and adapt to the full range of current and potential
 impacts of climate change, by minimising vulnerability and improving resilience.

Plan-making policies
CC1: Planning for climate change

1. Development plans should take a proactive approach to mitigating climate change and
   supporting the transition to net zero, in accordance with the objectives and provisions of
   the Climate Change Act 2008. They should also take a proactive approach to adapting to
   climate change, taking into account the implications of extreme weather and long-term
   climate trends including overheating, wildfires, drought, flood risk, coastal change, water
   supply, biodiversity and landscapes. They should do this by:

   a. Proposing development patterns through their spatial strategy and allocations which:

       i. Can help contribute to radical reductions in greenhouse gas emissions (which can
          be informed by an assessment of baseline carbon emissions and the potential
          effect of development options on future emissions and their mitigation); and

       ii. Avoid increased vulnerability and improve resilience to the effects of climate
           change (including through providing for necessary infrastructure improvements and
           the future relocation of homes and other uses where public safety would be at risk,
           for example as a consequence of coastal change).

   b. Addressing any specific risks from climate change in their proposed allocations for
      development, and necessary adaptations, both of which should be considered for the
      anticipated lifetime of the development;

   c. Setting local water efficiency standards for new development where these are justified
      in accordance with policy PM13; and

   d. Identifying opportunities for green infrastructure provision and nature-based solutions
      which can safeguard and improve carbon storage, support nature recovery and
      resilience, and which take account of Local Nature Recovery Strategies in accordance
      with policy N1.

National decision-making policies
CC2: Mitigation of climate change

1. In order to contribute to climate change mitigation and the transition to net zero,
   development proposals should, where relevant to the proposal:

   a. Accord with policies TR3 and TR4 so that sustainable patterns of movement are
                                                                                             28
      prioritised, opportunities are taken to improve walking, wheeling, cycling and public
      transport, and infrastructure is provided to support the transition to zero-emission
      vehicles;

   b. Support good access to facilities in order to limit the need to travel, whether through
      the development’s location, through development densities which improve catchment
      populations for local services, or by incorporating community facilities and premises to
      support local employment opportunities;

   c. Use design approaches which conserve energy and other resources in accordance
      with policy DP3(2)(b);

   d. Take advantage of opportunities to reuse existing structures and materials, including
      by reusing non-contaminated excavated soil and hardcore within the site;

   e. Take advantage of opportunities to draw low carbon energy from decentralised
      networks (such as district heat networks), where these are available, and to co-locate
      energy and heat generators and users, especially to take advantage of suppliers of
      surplus heat and energy;

   f. Contribute to the creation or restoration of habitats which can act as carbon stores,
      such as through woodland planting and peatland restoration, while avoiding harm to
      habitats which can act as important carbon stores, including peatland and salt marsh;
      and

   g. Not involve the extraction of fossil fuels unless it is in accordance with policy M5.

2. Substantial weight should be given to the benefits of improving the energy efficiency of
   existing buildings and/or drawing energy from district heat networks, renewable and low
   carbon sources (including through the installation of heat pumps and solar panels where
   these do not already benefit from permitted development rights) where this would be
   achieved through proposals for development.

CC3: Adaptation to climate change

1. Development proposals should take into account the current and potential impacts of
   climate change over the lifetime of the scheme, and in order to minimise vulnerability to
   these impacts should, where relevant to the proposal:

   a. Be located where the risk of flooding is minimised, or can be managed and the
      development made safe without increasing risk elsewhere, in accordance with policies
      F4, F5, F6, F7 and F8;

   b. Comply with policy F9 where development would be located in an area vulnerable to
      coastal change, as specified in that policy;

   c. Incorporate sustainable drainage systems to manage surface water flow rates and
      reduce volumes of runoff in accordance with policy F8;

   d. Use design approaches which minimise risks from overheating in accordance with
      policy DP3(2)(b), and include green infrastructure and suitable tree planting in
      accordance with policies DP3(2)(c) and N3; and
                                                                                               29
   e. Incorporate proportionate measures to mitigate against wildfires, where opportunities
      to do so exist and wildfires pose a particular risk (for example as a result of the
      combined effect of topography, prevailing wind direction and being located within or
      adjacent to heavily vegetated areas). Such measures should be designed to limit fuel
      loads for fires, and to create defendable spaces, such as by avoiding timber panel
      fences and incorporating firebreaks into development layouts and planting schemes.

2. Substantial weight should be given to the benefits of improving the resilience of existing
   buildings and public spaces to anticipated climate change impacts where this would be
   achieved through proposals for development.




                                                                                                30
6. Delivering a sufficient supply of homes
 The objective of the policies in this chapter is to support the delivery of a substantial
 increase in the supply of homes and traveller sites, by ensuring that a sufficient amount
 and variety of land can come forward where needed. This includes planning for an
 appropriate mix of accommodation for the local community and ensuring that land with
 permission is developed without unnecessary delay.

Plan-making policies
HO1: Assessing the need for homes

1. The preparation of spatial development strategies, and local plans where a spatial
   development strategy is not in place, should be based upon:

   a. A housing need assessment that establishes the overall number of homes needed in
      the area as a minimum over the plan period, using the standard method in Annex D;

   b. An assessment of the permanent and transit site accommodation needs of travellers
      in the area as a minimum over the plan period; and

   c. An understanding of any accommodation needs that cannot be met within
      neighbouring areas.

2. At the most appropriate level, development plans should also take into account an
   assessment of the size, type and tenure of housing or other accommodation needed for
   different groups. These groups include, but are not limited to:

   a. Those who require affordable housing (including Social Rent) as defined in the
      glossary at Annex B;

   b. Older people (including those who require retirement housing, housing-with-care and
      care homes);

   c. Disabled people;

   d. People who rent their homes;

   e. Families with children;

   f. Looked after children (evidence of need for which can be found in the relevant local
      authority’s Children’s Social Care Sufficiency Strategy) and those who require other
      specialist community-based accommodation (where evidence of need is available for
      the relevant local authority);

   g. Students;

   h. Travellers; and

   i. People wishing to commission or build their own homes.

                                                                                             31
HO2: Setting requirement figures for homes

1. Spatial development strategies should establish a housing requirement, and set pitch and
   plot requirements where a need has been identified, for each local planning authority
   within the strategy area. These figures should not be retested as part of local plan
   preparation unless there has been a significant change in circumstances which affects the
   overall requirement and its distribution to each local planning authority area.

2. Where a spatial development strategy is not in place, local plans should establish the
   housing requirement figure and pitch and plot requirements for their area, taking account
   of any relevant emerging spatial development strategy.

3. Housing requirement figures should:

   a. Reflect the extent to which the identified needs of the area can be accommodated
      over the plan period as a minimum, in accordance with policy S1; and

   b. Be higher than the overall figure identified in the local housing needs assessment
      where appropriate. This includes situations where a higher housing requirement is
      necessary to meet the needs of neighbouring areas, or to reflect growth ambitions
      linked to economic development or infrastructure investment.

4. Pitch and plot requirements should reflect the extent to which identified permanent and
   transit site accommodation needs of travellers in the area can be accommodated over the
   plan period as fully as possible, in accordance with policy S1.

5. In the case of local plans, a housing requirement figure should also be set for designated
   neighbourhood plan areas, unless it is impractical to do so (because a neighbourhood
   planning area has been designated at a late stage in the local plan preparation process,
   or after the plan has been adopted, or in instances where the local plan is out of date; in
   which case the local planning authority should provide an indicative figure instead). This
   requirement figure should take into account factors such as the latest evidence of local
   housing need, the population of the neighbourhood area and the most recently available
   planning strategy of the local planning authority. Local planning authorities should avoid
   setting housing requirement figures for neighbourhood planning areas at nil other than
   where:

   a. The local plan already meets or exceeds the housing need figure for the
      neighbourhood planning area; or

   b. The neighbourhood planning area has a clear and well evidenced need for no
      additional housing; or

   c. The constraints within the neighbourhood planning area are so substantial as to
      preclude any additional housing of any kind from coming forward.

HO3: Providing land for homes

1. Local plans should identify a sufficient supply and mix of sites to meet or exceed the
   housing requirement figure and pitch and plot requirements for their areas over the plan
   period, drawing on the land availability assessment in accordance with policy PM9. This
   should include:
                                                                                              32
   a. In relation to housing:

      i. A supply of specific deliverable sites for five years following the intended date of
         adoption of the plan, with an appropriate buffer (as set out in Annex D); and

      ii. A supply of specific, developable sites or broad locations for growth for the
          subsequent years 6 to 10 and, where possible, for the remaining plan period,
          where the plan covers more than 10 years.

   b. In relation to traveller sites:

      i. A supply of specific deliverable sites for five years following the intended date of
         adoption of the plan (as set out in Annex D); and

      ii. A supply of specific, developable sites or broad locations for growth for the
          subsequent years 6 to 10 and, where possible, for the remaining plan period,
          where the plan covers more than 10 years.

   c. A trajectory showing the expected rate of housing and pitch and plot delivery over the
      plan period and, where appropriate, the anticipated rate of development for specific
      sites.

2. Where an allowance is to be made for windfall sites as part of the identified supply, there
   should be compelling evidence that they will provide a reliable source of supply. Any
   allowance should be realistic having regard to the land availability assessment, historic
   windfall delivery rates and expected future trends.

HO4: Land for strategic site development

1. The development plan should, where appropriate, identify suitable locations for strategic
   sites for housing-led development (such as new settlements, new urban quarters or
   significant extensions to existing settlements). These locations should:

   a. Be capable of being supported by the necessary infrastructure and facilities at
      appropriate points in the development’s delivery (including complying with relevant
      aspects of policies TR1 and TR3, and taking advantage of any opportunities
      presented by existing or planned infrastructure investment);

   b. Be capable of supporting a sustainable community, with sufficient access to services
      and employment opportunities within the development itself (without expecting an
      unrealistic level of self-containment), or in larger towns to which there is good access
      by sustainable transport modes; and

   c. Address strategic environmental opportunities and safeguards, including those set out
      in Local Nature Recovery Strategies.

2. Local plans should identify specific sites for this form of development, together with
   infrastructure and other site-specific requirements, including:

   a. Setting clear expectations for the quality of places to be created by using design tools
      such as masterplans and design codes (which can be informed by the Design and
                                                                                                33
          Placemaking planning practice guidance), and drawing on other principles which may
          be relevant such as Garden City Principles;

       b. Making a realistic assessment of the likely rates of delivery and identifying
          opportunities for supporting rapid implementation, such as through joint ventures, land
          assembly or locally led development corporations; and

       c. Supporting delivery by setting expectations for an appropriate mix of tenures which
          would meet the needs of different groups, as set out in policy HO5(1)(d).

HO5: Meeting the needs of different groups

1. The development plan should, at the most appropriate level, set out policies to address
   the housing needs of different groups (including, but not limited to, those assessed under
   policy HO1). This should include:

       a. In relation to affordable housing:

          i. Setting requirements for the type and mix of affordable housing (applying the
             definition in the glossary at Annex B) required to meet identified local needs,
             including the minimum proportion of Social Rent homes required as part of major
             development. In Designated Rural Areas development plans may set affordable
             housing requirements for residential developments which are not major
             development; and

          ii. Setting a specific affordable housing requirement (or requirements) for major
              development involving the provision of housing on land which is proposed to be
              released from the Green Belt, or which may be approved on land within the Green
              Belt29.

       b. Setting out the proportion of housing on major developments to be delivered to
          requirements M4(2) and M4(3) of the Building Regulations. Requirements should
          meet or exceed local levels of need, and should ensure that no less than 40% of
          homes on major developments are delivered to M4(2) standards (subject to
          any appropriate exemptions set out in the development plan);

       c. Identifying sites which can provide specific types of accommodation where there is an
          identified need, including (but not limited to):

          i. Specialist housing for older people;

          ii. Purpose-built accommodation for students;

          iii. Plots for self and custom build housing and community-led development; and

          iv. Sites suitable for gypsies and travellers and travelling showpeople, including sites
              suitable for mixed residential and business uses, having regard to the safety and

29 This requirement may be set as a single rate or be set at differential rates, and should:

  i.     Be set at a higher level than that which would apply to land which is not within or proposed to be
         released from the Green Belt; and
  ii.    Require at least 50% of the housing to be affordable, unless this would make the development of these
         sites unviable (when tested in accordance with national planning practice guidance on viability).
                                                                                                             34
          amenity of the occupants and neighbouring residents. Sites identified for travelling
          showpeople should have regard to their need for mixed-use yards with both
          residential accommodation and space for storage of equipment.

   d. Setting expectations for an appropriate mix of tenures to be provided on allocated
      sites where this would be appropriate and deliverable, taking into account the needs of
      different groups including those assessed under policy HO1.

HO6: Planning for a diverse mix of sites

1. To support the provision of a diverse mix of sites, local plans should:

   a. Allocate land to accommodate at least 10% of the housing requirement on sites no
      larger than one hectare, and a further 10% on sites of between one and two and a half
      hectares, unless there are strong reasons why these targets cannot be achieved; and

   b. Allocate sites which will support and enhance the vitality of rural communities and
      enable villages to grow and thrive, especially where this will support local services.

National decision-making policies
HO7: Meeting the need for homes

1. In applying the policies in this Framework, substantial weight should be given to the
   benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
   accommodation needs of the community, as identified through needs assessments
   prepared for the area of the local planning authority and other relevant evidence. This
   includes, but is not limited to, homes needed for different groups assessed under policy
   HO1.

HO8: Providing affordable homes

1. Development proposals should meet or exceed up-to-date development plan
   requirements for the proportion and mix of affordable housing tenures relevant to the
   location, including the minimum proportion of Social Rent. This should be provided on-site
   unless:

   a. Off-site delivery on an alternative nearby site would optimise the quality or quantity of
      affordable homes built; or

   b. A cash payment in lieu of on or off-site provision can be justified robustly, and the
      agreed approach contributes towards the objective of creating mixed and balanced
      communities.

2. Development proposals that include military affordable housing should not be required to
   meet development plan requirements for the mix of affordable housing tenures (including
   the minimum proportion of Social Rent). These proposals should:

   a. Demonstrate an evidenced unmet need for military affordable housing (as provided by
      the Ministry of Defence); and

   b. Meet development plan requirements for the proportion of affordable housing on the
                                                                                               35
      site. This includes where military affordable housing is the only form of affordable
      housing provided, or where military affordable housing is delivered alongside other
      tenures of affordable housing.

3. Where development proposals meet or exceed up-to-date development plan
   requirements for the proportion and mix of affordable housing tenures, including the
   minimum proportion of Social Rent properties, a flexible approach should be taken to the
   application of any development plan requirements relating to the number of bedrooms
   provided in market homes, taking into account prevailing market conditions.

4. Where development proposals include the reuse or redevelopment of vacant buildings,
   any affordable housing contributions which are due should be reduced by a proportionate
   amount, equivalent to the gross floorspace of the existing building or buildings. This does
   not apply to vacant buildings which have been abandoned, or to major development on
   land within or released from the Green Belt (to which the requirements in policy GB8
   apply).

HO9: Specialist forms of accommodation

1. Development proposals to address specialist housing needs should provide living
   conditions and access to services which are appropriate to the needs of their residents
   and users. This includes:

   a. Specialist housing for older or disabled people:

      i. Being located where residents will be able to access frequently-used services
         easily and safely by walking, wheeling (including mobility scooters) and by public
         or on-site transport services; including through facilities provided as part of the
         scheme; and

      ii. Being delivered to M4(2) or M4(3) accessibility standards.

   b. Specialist community-based accommodation:

      i. Being supported by a management plan or other supporting evidence which shows
         how the development will provide a safe and secure environment for residents; and

      ii. Being located where residents will be able to access frequently-used services
          easily and safely.

   c. Purpose-built student and large-scale shared living accommodation:

      i. Being located where residents will be able to access frequently-used services
         (and, for student accommodation, relevant education facilities) easily and safely by
         walking, wheeling, cycling and public transport;

      ii. Providing adequate living and storage space and sufficient shared cooking, laundry
          and amenity areas (other than where cooking and laundry facilities are provided
          within student rooms, in which case these do not need to be available on a shared
          basis); and

      iii. Being supported by a management plan which shows how the development will be
                                                                                               36
          managed and maintained to ensure the continued quality of the accommodation,
          communal facilities and services.

HO10: Exception sites

1. Development proposals for housing on land not already allocated for this purpose, and
   which are located outside settlements, should be supported where they are:

   a. A rural exception site (as defined in the glossary at Annex B) that will provide
      affordable housing to meet identified local needs – as evidenced through a local
      housing needs survey or secondary data which is no more than five years old; or

   b. Sites which comprise community-led development as defined in the glossary at Annex
      B.

2. Unless otherwise specified in the development plan, exception sites brought forward in
   accordance with paragraph 1 of this policy should:

   a. Adjoin or be physically well-related to a settlement;

   b. Not involve built development which is greater than one hectare in extent, or exceed
      5% of the size of the existing settlement, whichever is greater (unless specific
      provision to exceed these limits is made in the development plan); and

   c. Include one or more types of affordable housing. A proportion of market homes may
      be allowed on the site where essential to enable the delivery of affordable units
      without grant funding.

HO11: Isolated homes in the countryside

1. Development proposals for isolated homes in the countryside should only be supported
   where one or more of the following circumstances apply:

   a. There is an essential need for a rural worker, including those taking majority control of
      a farm business, to live permanently at or near their place of work in the countryside;

   b. The development would be appropriate enabling development to secure the future of
      heritage assets in accordance with policy HE4;

   c. The development would reuse a redundant or disused building and enhance its
      immediate setting, including proposals which would secure the long-term reuse of a
      vacant or underused listed building (subject to taking into account any harm to its
      significance, as set out in policy HE6);

   d. The development would involve the subdivision of an existing residential building; or

   e. The design is of exceptional quality, in that it:

      i. Is truly outstanding, reflecting the highest standards in architecture, and would help
         to raise standards of design more generally in rural areas; and



                                                                                              37
       ii. Would significantly enhance its immediate setting, and be sensitive to the defining
           characteristics of the local area.

HO12: Traveller sites

1. Development proposals for traveller sites should be located so that they:

   a. Provide a settled base while recognising the extent to which traditional lifestyles
      (whereby some travellers live and work from the same location thereby omitting many
      travel to work journeys) can contribute to sustainability and may also mean that
      locations not well-related to existing settlements may be appropriate; and

   b. Enable access to frequently used services, such as education, welfare and health
      services, including ensuring that children can attend school on a regular basis.

2. When considering proposals for traveller sites, including for the purposes of considering
   need under policies S5 and GB7, local planning authorities should take into account the
   existing level of local provision and need for additional sites and other personal
   circumstances which may be relevant. Applications from any traveller should be
   considered and not just those with local connections.

3. Where development proposals require the permanent or temporary relocation of an
   authorised traveller site, an alternative site should be identified and provided. Suitable
   alternative sites should take into account the views of existing residents as well as
   existing family or community groupings where possible.

HO13: Build out of residential and strategic sites

1. To significantly boost the supply of homes, it is important that land with permission is
   developed without unnecessary delay. Proposals for major development involving the
   provision of housing should be capable of bringing the housing forward within a
   reasonable period, taking into account the proposed tenure mix for the development, local
   market conditions (including absorption rates) and the development history of the site.

2. For all proposals involving housing, consideration should be given to whether to impose a
   planning condition requiring that development begins within a timescale shorter than the
   relevant statutory default period, where this would expedite the development without
   threatening its implementation or viability.

3. In relation to development proposals for strategic sites, the consenting framework should:

   a. Set out the parameters and requirements for the design, infrastructure and other
      features of the development (including the quantity and type of affordable housing to
      be provided), with the level of initial and subsequent detail tailored to the proposed
      scale and phasing of the development; and

   b. Be flexible enough to respond positively to changing circumstances as phases are
      brought forward, including changes to housing need, infrastructure requirements,
      viability and design.

4. Where an emerging development plan (however advanced) proposes to allocate one or
   more strategic sites, development proposals should not be inconsistent with the proposed
                                                                                                38
   scale, location and phasing of those strategic sites. This applies notwithstanding the
   application of policy DM4(2) where relevant.

5. Paragraph 1 of this policy applies to strategic sites involving the provision of housing, and
   to other major development involving the provision of housing. Paragraph 2 applies to all
   development involving the provision of housing. Paragraphs 3 and 4 apply to all strategic
   sites.




                                                                                              39
7. Building a strong, effective economy
 The objective of the policies in this chapter is to enable businesses to invest, expand and
 adapt in a way that reflects the opportunities, challenges and characteristics of different
 areas, and supports long-term economic growth both locally and nationally.

Plan-making policies
E1: Providing the conditions for long-term economic growth

1. To support business investment and employment, development plans should, at the most
   appropriate level:

    a. Set out a clear economic vision and strategy, which takes a positive, proactive and
       realistic approach to encouraging sustainable economic growth in both urban and rural
       areas, having regard to the Industrial Strategy30 and any relevant strategic and local
       strategies for economic development and regeneration. In doing so plans should take
       into account both local business needs and wider needs and opportunities for
       economic growth and investment including relevant market signals, priority places for
       investment in key sectors set out in the Industrial Strategy, and the location of
       Industrial Strategy Zones31 and AI Growth Zones;

    b. Seek to address potential barriers to investment, such as inadequate infrastructure,
       services or housing, or a poor environment; and

    c. Allocate sites to implement the economic vision and strategy and meet identified
       needs over the plan period, paying particular regard to facilitating development to
       meet the needs of a modern economy (including sites and premises which are flexible
       and adaptable) and the specific locational requirements of different sectors. This
       includes, where a need exists or is anticipated, making provision for:

        i. Clusters, networks and sites for knowledge and data-driven, creative or high
           technology industries; and for new, expanded or upgraded facilities and
           infrastructure to support the growth of these industries (including laboratories,
           campus facilities, data centres and associated generating capacity, and electricity
           network infrastructure to provide grid connections);

       ii. Freight and logistics operations at a variety of scales and in suitably accessible
           locations that allow for the efficient and reliable handling of goods, especially where
           this is needed to support the supply chain (including ‘last mile’ deliveries), transport
           innovation and decarbonisation; and

       iii. The expansion or modernisation of other businesses of local, regional or national
            importance to support economic growth and resilience (such as leisure and
            tourism, agriculture and other rural and land-based businesses which may be of
            particular importance in certain areas).


30 The UK’s Modern Industrial Strategy published in: Industrial Strategy - GOV.UK.
31 Industrial Strategy Zones Action Plan (MHCLG, June 2025) published in: Industrial Strategy Zones Action

Plan - GOV.UK.
                                                                                                             40
2. Given changing commercial property requirements, development plans should not be
   overly prescriptive about the types of uses or unit sizes that would be acceptable on
   particular sites (other than where there is a clear and justified rationale for being specific
   about acceptable uses at the plan-making stage).

National decision-making policies
E2: Meeting the need for business land and premises

1. To support business growth, substantial weight should be given to:

   a. The economic benefits of proposals for commercial development which allow
      businesses to invest, expand and/or adapt; especially where this would support the
      economic vision and strategy for the area, the implementation of the Industrial
      Strategy, support improvements in freight and logistics and/or reflect proposals for
      Industrial Strategy Zones and AI Growth Zones; and

   b. Benefits for domestic food production, animal welfare and/or the environment which
      can be demonstrated through proposals for development for farm and agricultural
      modernisation.

2. Where a development proposal is required to demonstrate whether an unmet need exists
   (including under policy S5) consideration should be given to whether:

   a. Market signals indicate an undersupply of specific types of business land or premises,
      taking into account the anticipated catchment area for the type of development
      proposed, the changing needs of different sectors and the availability of suitable
      existing land and buildings; or

   b. The specific locational requirements of the proposal are met by existing allocations in
      the development plan. This includes, but is not limited to, situations where:

       i. Existing businesses plan to expand or improve their premises, or clusters or
          networks of businesses need to grow (such as clusters of knowledge and data-
          driven, creative or high technology industries and associated facilities and
          infrastructure); or

       ii. The availability of infrastructure (such as electricity network infrastructure to
           provide adequate grid connections, or water and wastewater capacity) makes
           certain locations particularly important, including opportunities to co-locate large-
           scale generators and users of power (such as data centres); or

       iii. Proposals would meet a local, regional or national need for the provision of new,
            expanded or upgraded facilities that would result in more efficient, reliable or
            sustainable handling of goods (whether for their receipt, storage, processing,
            interchange or distribution).

E3: Freight and logistics

1. To support the effective and efficient movement of goods, development proposals for
   freight and logistics uses and associated infrastructure should:
                                                                                                   41
   a. Have good access to transport networks (including via sustainable transport modes
      where possible) appropriate to the type of development;

   b. Be sited and designed to limit environmental impacts (such as through the colocation
      or intensification of facilities to limit vehicle movements, provision of electric vehicle
      charging infrastructure and sensitive building design and landscaping). The impact on
      local residents or other neighbouring uses should be acceptable, taking into account
      proposed mitigation, especially where night-time operations will be required; and

   c. Provide sufficient and secure parking for lorries or other vehicles to cater for the
      anticipated use, in accordance with policy TR4(1)(e).

E4: Rural business development

1. In applying policy E2, the sustainable growth of businesses in rural areas should be
   supported, including through:

   a. The conversion of existing buildings and well-designed new buildings;

   b. The development and diversification of agricultural and other land-based businesses;

   c. Facilities to support rural leisure and tourism and measures to retain and expand
      accessible local shops and services; and

   d. Development to maintain and enhance farm viability and sustainability and support
      domestic food production, such as improved accommodation for livestock, on-farm
      reservoirs, greenhouses, polytunnels, farm shops and temporary accommodation for
      seasonal workers (where this accommodation is ancillary to the agricultural use and
      not for permanent occupation).

2. Development proposals to meet business needs in rural areas may need to be located
   outside settlements, and in locations that are not well served by public transport. In these
   circumstances:

   a. Development proposals should take opportunities, where they exist, to use previously
      developed land, and sites that are physically well-related to existing development; and

   b. The siting and design of development should be appropriate having regard to the
      character of its surroundings.




                                                                                              42
8. Ensuring the vitality of town centres
 The objective of the policies in this chapter is to promote the long-term vitality and viability
 of town centres by prioritising them as locations for main town centre uses and allowing
 them to adapt to changing community and business needs, in a way which reflects their
 locally distinctive roles and opportunities. For the purpose of this chapter ‘town centres’
 includes city, town, district and local centres as defined in the glossary at Annex B.

Plan-making policies
TC1: Planning for town centres

1. To promote the long-term vitality and viability of town centres, development plans should,
   at the most appropriate level:

   a. Be informed by a strategy for town centres in the area, to ensure that the full range of
      potential needs and opportunities for development is considered. This includes the
      scope to accommodate additional floorspace, to broaden the mix of uses beyond main
      town centre uses (including residential development) where this would not undermine
      the vitality and viability of a centre, to strengthen or re-introduce markets, to bring
      vacant sites and premises back into use, and to reduce or expand the boundaries of
      town centres where appropriate;

   b. Set out the hierarchy of centres, and any areas within them where specific policies on
      the nature and scale of development apply, including:

       i. The location and extent of town centres and primary shopping areas;

       ii. Areas particularly suitable for a greater diversity and/or intensification of use,
           including through residential development; and

       iii. Areas within which infrastructure and public realm improvements are proposed.

   c. Allocate a range of suitable sites in town centres to meet the scale and type of main
      town centre uses needed over the plan period in these locations, as well as for any
      complementary uses. Before reviewing town centre boundaries to accommodate any
      increase in development which is needed, existing vacant town centre sites and areas
      that are particularly suitable for intensification should be considered to maximise
      effective use of land;

   d. Where suitable and viable town centre sites are not available to meet the anticipated
      need for main town centre uses, allocate appropriate edge of centre sites that are well
      connected to the town centre. If sufficient edge of centre sites cannot be identified,
      policies should set out proposals for identified needs to be met in other accessible
      locations that are well connected to the town centre; and

   e. Where appropriate, set a locally defined floorspace threshold for development
      proposals outside town centres, above which an impact assessment would be
      required, as set out in policy TC4.

                                                                                                    43
2. Local planning authorities should consider the use of design guides, design codes and
   masterplans to support their vision for, and the development of, town centres. They
   should also consider the use of Article 4 directions to remove a permitted development
   right where these are justified as a means to support the vitality and viability of particular
   centres and maintain their character.

National decision-making policies
TC2: Development in town centres

1. In considering proposals for development in town centres, substantial weight should be
   given to the benefits of:

   a. Supporting the overall vitality and viability of the centre, including where this can be
      achieved through the diversification of uses, intensification and provision of residential
      accommodation (provided this would not conflict with policies in the development plan
      for specific locations); and

   b. Improving or retaining access to local shops and other facilities which provide day-to-
      day services for the local community.

TC3: Main town centre uses outside town centres

1. A sequential test should be applied to proposals for main town centre uses for which
   planning permission is required, where these are neither in an existing centre nor in
   accordance with an allocation for that purpose in an up-to-date development plan.

2. The sequential test means that main town centre uses involving new development should
   be located within town centres identified in the development plan; then, if this is not
   feasible, in edge of centre locations; and only if suitable sites are not available (or
   expected to become available within a reasonable period) should out of centre sites be
   considered. When considering edge of centre and out of centre locations, preference
   should be given to accessible sites which are well connected to the town centre by
   sustainable transport modes.

3. Applicants and local planning authorities should exercise flexibility when considering
   issues such as format and scale, so that opportunities to utilise suitable town centre or
   edge of centre sites are fully explored.

4. Where a development proposal fails to satisfy the sequential test, or is likely to have a
   significant adverse impact on one or more of the considerations in policy TC4, it should
   be refused.

5. This sequential test does not apply to applications for small scale rural offices or other
   small scale rural development.

TC4: Assessing the impact of development on town centres

1. Development proposals for retail and leisure uses located outside town centres should be
   accompanied by an impact assessment if the proposal exceeds a floorspace threshold
   set out in an up-to-date development plan, and is not on a site which is allocated for the

                                                                                                44
   proposed use in the plan. If no threshold for impact assessments has been set in the
   development plan, a default threshold of 2,500m2 gross floorspace should be applied.

2. In circumstances where an impact assessment is required, it should be demonstrated that
   the development would be unlikely to have a significant adverse impact on:

   a. Existing, committed and planned public and private investment in a town centre or
      centres in the catchment area of the proposal; and

   b. Town centre vitality and viability, including local consumer choice and trade in the
      town centre and the wider retail catchment (as applicable to the scale and nature of
      the scheme).




                                                                                             45
9. Supporting high quality communications
 The objective of the policies in this chapter is to support the expansion and upgrading of
 telecommunications infrastructure, in ways which limit an unnecessary proliferation of
 equipment and respect important environmental safeguards. Advanced, high quality and
 reliable communications are essential to meet changing technological, social, business and
 security requirements (including through delivering coverage of higher quality standalone
 5G in all populated areas by 2030, and nationwide gigabit-capable broadband by 2032).

National decision-making policies
CO1: Proposals for telecommunications infrastructure

1. In considering proposals for the expansion or upgrading of electronic telecommunications
   networks, substantial weight should be given to the benefits of maintaining or improving
   network coverage, capacity, reliability and resilience, including where significant
   improvements are required such as along rail corridors. This includes, but is not limited to,
   providing for next generation wireless technologies (such as standalone 5G), gigabit-
   capable broadband connections and supporting infrastructure such as fibre exchanges.
   Proposals for such development should:

    a. Use existing masts, buildings and other structures already employed for this purpose,
       upgrade, or replace existing infrastructure, unless there is no reasonable opportunity
       to do so (taking into consideration meeting consumer needs, the efficient operation of
       the network and providing reasonable capacity for future expansion);

    b. Be sited and designed to minimise the visual impact of the proposals, especially in
       situations where a new site or structure is proposed, so far as practical taking into
       account its operational requirements;

    c. Not result in cumulative exposure to non-ionising radiation exceeding International
       Commission guidelines32 when the development is operational; and

    d. Not cause significant and irremediable interference with other electrical equipment, air
       traffic services or instrumentation operated in the national interest.

2. In assessing proposals for telecommunications infrastructure, local planning authorities
   should not require minimum distances to be maintained between telecommunications
   infrastructure and other development, seek to prevent competition between different
   operators, question the need for the expansion or upgrading of telecommunications
   networks, or use health safeguarding standards different from the International
   Commission guidelines on non-ionising radiation protection.

CO2: Supporting information for telecommunications infrastructure proposals

1. Development proposals for electronic telecommunications infrastructure (including
   applications for prior approval under the General Permitted Development Order, as
   amended) should be supported by the following, where relevant:

32 International Commission guidelines published in: International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation

Protection guidelines.
                                                                                                          46
a. Information on the outcome of pre-submission consultation with organisations with an
   interest in the proposed development (in particular with the relevant body where a
   mast is to be installed near a school or college, or within a statutory safeguarding zone
   surrounding an aerodrome, technical site or military explosives storage area;

b. Where a new site is proposed, evidence that the applicant has sought to keep the
   number of these to a minimum in accordance with policy CO1(1)(a). This should
   include evidence that the possibility of erecting any antennas on an existing building,
   mast or other structure has been explored; and

c. Evidence demonstrating compliance with policy CO1(1)(c) and (d), including a
   statement that self-certifies that the cumulative exposure, when operational, will not
   exceed International Commission guidelines on non-ionising radiation protection.




                                                                                            47
10. Securing clean energy and water
 The objective of the policies in this chapter is to support the development and operation of
 energy and water infrastructure in ways which align with wider development, clean power
 and net zero objectives (including the delivery of clean power by 2030).

Plan-making policies
W1: Planning for energy and water

1. The development plan should be informed by early engagement between the relevant
   plan-making authority, utility providers, regulators and network operators, so that there is
   a clear understanding of energy supply and network capacity, water supply, drainage and
   wastewater capacity, and associated requirements for additional infrastructure provision.
   This engagement should consider the impacts of planned growth, changing consumption
   patterns and climate change, as well as relevant strategic infrastructure plans33, and be
   used to address potential constraints to development arising from current or anticipated
   infrastructure shortfalls.

2. The development plan should reflect this at the most appropriate level by:

   a. Taking these factors into account in the location and phasing of planned growth;

   b. Making provision for development which is required for new or enhanced renewable
      and low carbon energy development, electricity network infrastructure, water supply,
      drainage and wastewater infrastructure, whether as part of wider development
      proposals or as stand-alone developments; and

   c. Setting out any measures to avoid constraints on the operation or future expansion of
      renewable and low carbon energy development and electricity network infrastructure
      and water supply and wastewater infrastructure as a result of neighbouring (or nearby)
      development.

W2: Securing renewable and low carbon energy and electricity network infrastructure

1. The development plan should support the transition to clean power by planning positively
   for the increased supply and use of renewable and low carbon energy and electricity
   network infrastructure. This means that the development plan, should, at the most
   appropriate level, seek to maximise the potential for suitable development by identifying:

   a. Areas which are suitable for renewable and low carbon energy development and
      electricity network infrastructure, including for future re-powering and life extension,
      where this would help secure their development; and

   b. Opportunities for development to draw its heat or energy supply from decentralised
      networks (such as district heat networks) or renewable or low carbon energy supply


33 This includes Water Resource Management Plans, Drainage and Wastewater Management Plans and, once

they are published, the Strategic Spatial Energy Plan (SSEP), Centralised Strategic Network Plan (CSNP) and
Regional Energy Strategic Plans (RESPs).
                                                                                                          48
        systems; and to co-locate potential customers and suppliers of surplus heat or
        energy34.

National decision-making policies
W3: Renewable and low carbon energy development and electricity network
infrastructure

1. In considering proposals for renewable and low-carbon energy development and
   electricity network infrastructure, substantial weight should be given to:

    a. The benefits for improving energy security, supporting economic development and/or
       the transition to a net zero future;

    b. In the case of applications for the re-powering and life-extension of existing sites, the
       additional benefit of utilising an established site for this purpose; and

    c. The contribution that small-scale and community-led renewable and low carbon
       energy projects can make to reducing greenhouse gas emissions, along with their
       associated economic and social benefits.

2. Applicants should not be required to demonstrate the need for renewable or low carbon
   energy development and electricity network infrastructure. Where proposals for this form
   of development come forward outside areas which have been identified as suitable for
   them in the development plan, their acceptability should be assessed against the national
   decision-making policies in this Framework, taken as a whole.

3. Where development is expected to be time-limited, applications should be accompanied
   by proposals for decommissioning and site restoration, including details of how these
   measures are expected to be implemented.

W4: Water infrastructure

1. In considering proposals for water supply, drainage and wastewater development,
   substantial weight should be given to the benefits of:

    a. Providing the capacity needed to serve proposed development and/or improving the
       security of supply and capacity for existing users (both residential and commercial,
       including agricultural users); and

    b. Improving water quality and reducing water-borne pollution.

2. Applicants should not be required to demonstrate the need for water infrastructure
   developments.




34 Once they are in place, there should be consideration of Heat Network Zones.

                                                                                               49
11. Facilitating the sustainable use of minerals
 The objective of the policies in this chapter is to ensure there is a sufficient supply of
 minerals, which are essential to provide the infrastructure, buildings, green energy and
 goods that the country needs; while restricting peat, coal and onshore oil and gas
 extraction for environmental reasons. Since minerals are a finite natural resource, and can
 only be worked where they are found, best use needs to be made of them to secure their
 long-term conservation.

Plan-making policies
M1: Planning for a sufficient supply of minerals

1. The development plan should provide for a sufficient and timely supply of minerals of
   national and local importance.

2. This means that in relation to aggregate minerals, the development plan should:

    a. Use the Local Aggregate Assessment, the advice of the Aggregate Working Parties
       and the National Aggregate Co-ordinating Group as appropriate, and any published
       National and Sub National Guidelines on future supply, to identify the provision
       needed in the plan area35. The Local Aggregate Assessment should be prepared
       annually by the mineral planning authority, either individually or jointly, to forecast
       future demand, based on a rolling average of ten years’ sales data and other relevant
       local information and an assessment of all supply options (including marine dredged,
       secondary and recycled sources);

    b. Allocate sites and/or identify preferred areas to maintain this provision, including
       landbanks of at least seven years for sand and gravel and at least ten years for
       crushed rock (longer periods may be appropriate to take account of the need to supply
       a range of types of aggregates, locations of permitted reserves relative to markets,
       and the productive capacity of permitted sites);

    c. Calculate and maintain separate landbanks for any aggregate materials of a specific
       type or quality which have a distinct and separate market; and

    d. Ensure that large landbanks bound up in very few sites do not stifle competition.

3. In relation to industrial minerals, the development plan should:

    a. Use evidence of existing site capacities and demand to identify the level of provision
       needed to maintain a continuing level of supply for their use in industrial and
       manufacturing processes; and through cooperation with neighbouring and more
       distant authorities, identify how these requirements can be met through the allocation
       of sites and/or identification of preferred areas, taking into account the distribution of
       industrial minerals deposits;

    b. Maintain reserves of:

35 The assessment of the provision needed for aggregate and industrial minerals may, where appropriate, be

undertaken and set out through the preparation of spatial development strategies.
                                                                                                             50
      i. At least 10 years for individual silica sand sites;

      ii. At least 15 years for silica sand sites where significant new capital is required, and
          for cement primary (chalk and limestone) and secondary (clay and shale) materials
          to maintain an existing plant; and

      iii. At least 25 years for brick clay, and for cement primary and secondary materials
           where this is needed to support a new kiln.

   c. Take account of the need for the provision of brick clay from a number of different
      sources to enable appropriate blends to be made.

4. In relation to oil and gas, the development plan should distinguish between, and plan for,
   the three phases of development (exploration, appraisal and production) within licensed
   areas. The development plan should not identify new sites or extensions to existing sites
   outside licensed areas.

5. The development plan should not identify new sites or extensions to existing sites for peat
   or coal extraction.

6. Relevant development plan policies should take account of the contribution that substitute
   or secondary and recycled materials and minerals waste can make to supply, in
   preference to the extraction of primary materials, whilst aiming to source minerals
   supplies indigenously. Where further extraction is necessary, landbanks of non-energy
   minerals should so far as practical be maintained through sites which lie outside National
   Parks, the Broads, National Landscapes and designated heritage assets, although the
   identification of sites or preferred areas in development plans should also reflect that
   minerals can only be worked where they are found.

M2: Safeguarding mineral resources and infrastructure through plan-making

1. The development plan should:

   a. Define Mineral Safeguarding Areas and (in two tier areas) Mineral Consultation Areas
      to support the safeguarding of mineral resources;

   b. Where necessary to prevent the sterilisation of mineral resources, require the prior
      extraction of minerals on sites allocated for non-mineral development, where practical
      and environmentally feasible; and

   c. Identify existing, planned and potential sites which need to be safeguarded for: the
      bulk transport, handling and processing of minerals; the manufacture of concrete and
      concrete products; and the handling, processing and distribution of substitute,
      recycled and secondary aggregate material.




                                                                                              51
National decision-making policies
M3: Assessing the benefits of mineral development

1. In assessing proposals for minerals development36, substantial weight should be given to
   the benefits of mineral extraction and processing, including to the economy. In this
   context, particular importance should be given to:

    a. Maintaining minimum reserves of aggregates and industrial minerals, as specified in
       policy M1(2)(b) and M1(3)(b);

    b. Ensuring that the capacity of operations to supply a wide range of materials is
       maintained, with reserves which are sufficient to support the level of actual and
       proposed investment required for new or existing plant, and the maintenance and
       improvement of existing plant and equipment;

    c. Processing secondary aggregates, where this can help to reduce the need for new
       extraction;

    d. Facilitating the exploration and extraction or processing of critical and growth minerals,
       the use of which supports any or all of the following:

        i. The green energy transition;

        ii. The transition to net zero;

        iii. National security; and

        iv. The growth of key sectors set out in the Industrial Strategy37.

    e. Maintaining a supply of building and roofing stone for the repair or extension of historic
       buildings and structures, or where the use of traditional materials in construction is
       important to conserve or enhance the character of an area. The duration of planning
       permission should, where appropriate, give the flexibility needed to cater for the
       intermittent or low rate of working at many sites.

M4: Considering the impacts of mineral development

1. Proposals for mineral development should:

    a. Not have unacceptable adverse impact on the natural and historic environment,
       human health or aviation safety, taking into account the national decision-making
       policies in this Framework; including as a result of any cumulative effect of multiple
       impacts from individual sites and/or from a number of sites in a locality;

    b. Ensure any unavoidable noise, dust and particle emissions and any vibrations from
       blasting will be controlled, mitigated or removed at source, and that appropriate noise
       limits are established for extraction in proximity to noise sensitive properties
36 Other than for development involving peat, coal or onshore oil and gas extraction, to which this policy does

not apply.
37 The UK’s Modern Industrial Strategy published in: Industrial Strategy - GOV.UK.

                                                                                                                  52
       (recognising that some noisy short-term activities, which may otherwise be regarded
       as unacceptable, are unavoidable to facilitate minerals extraction); and

   c. Provide for restoration and aftercare at the earliest opportunity, to be carried out to
      high environmental standards, through the application of appropriate conditions.
      Bonds or other financial guarantees to underpin planning conditions should only be
      sought in exceptional circumstances.

M5: Development involving peat, coal or onshore oil and gas

1. Proposals for the extraction of peat at new or extended sites should be refused.

2. Development involving surface or underground coal workings, or for onshore oil and gas
   extraction, should be refused unless it is necessary:

   a. To facilitate the exploration, appraisal or production of oil and gas in an area where
      the North Sea Transition Authority has granted petroleum rights, including licensed
      areas; or

   b. To allow the extraction of other minerals of national and local importance (such as
      fireclay), where the removal of coal is incidental to and necessary for this purpose; or

   c. For public safety; or

   d. For the purpose of ground stabilisation or to enable other development (where this can
      only be achieved by the full or partial removal of shallow coal deposits); or

   e. To facilitate the capture and use of methane from coal mines in active and abandoned
      coalfield areas.

3. If development is proposed for surface or underground coal extraction under the criteria
   listed in paragraph 2 of this policy, minerals planning authorities should provide for coal
   producers to extract separately, and if necessary stockpile, fireclay so that it remains
   available for use.

4. Minerals planning authorities should support proposals for underground gas and carbon
   storage and associated infrastructure if local geological circumstances indicate the
   proposals are feasible. It should also be ensured that the integrity and safety of
   underground storage facilities are appropriate, taking into account the maintenance of gas
   pressure, prevention of leakage of gas and the avoidance of pollution.

M6: Safeguarding mineral resources and infrastructure through decision-making

1. Proposals for non-mineral development should not:

   a. Constrain potential future use for mineral working in a Mineral Safeguarding Area; or

   b. Prevent or constrain the use of existing, planned and potential sites for:

       i. The bulk transport, handling and processing of minerals;

       ii. The manufacture of concrete and concrete products; or
                                                                                                 53
      iii. The handling, processing and distribution of substitute, recycled and secondary
           aggregate material.

2. Where proposals for non-mineral development are located within a Minerals Consultation
   Area, the decision-making authority should consult the mineral planning authority and
   take account of the local minerals plan before determining the planning application.

3. The prior extraction of minerals, where practical and environmentally feasible, should be
   supported where it would prevent the sterilisation of minerals deposits as a consequence
   of other forms of development proposals or allocations.




                                                                                             54
12. Making effective use of land
 The objective of the policies in this chapter is to promote the effective use of land in
 meeting the need for homes and other uses, while safeguarding and improving the
 environment and ensuring safe and healthy living conditions.

Plan-making policies
L1: Planning for an effective use of land

1. To support the effective and efficient use of land the development plan should, at the
   most appropriate level:

   a. Identify ways of accommodating as much as possible of the identified need for
      development in the area on previously developed land, including by:

       i. Allocating sites of all sizes which have the potential for redevelopment to secure a
          more effective use, such as through the reuse of service yards, lock-ups, car parks
          and other transport infrastructure which are no longer required, the reuse or
          intensification of underutilised retail and business sites, and estate regeneration
          schemes;

       ii. Setting out where particular parts of the plan area provide scope for intensification
           through additional development;

       iii. Using design guides, design codes and (where appropriate) masterplans to
            illustrate opportunities for making more effective use of land on sites of different
            sizes. This includes proposals for the use of allocated sites, as well as common
            design principles for small sites such as filling gaps in prevailing roof lines, the
            redevelopment of low-density residential plots, introducing higher buildings at
            street corners and in other suitable locations, and infill development within
            residential curtilages;

       iv. Setting minimum residential density standards for town centres and for locations
           that have a high level of connectivity, where this can support more effective land
           use and extend beyond the minimum requirements of policy L3; and

       v. Identifying whether minimum density standards should be set for other parts of the
          plan area, especially where there are opportunities for intensification. It may be
          appropriate to set out a range of densities that reflect the identified need for
          different types of housing, local market conditions, the availability of infrastructure
          and its scope for improvement, the importance of securing well-designed, attractive
          and healthy places, and the desirability of maintaining an area’s prevailing
          character or of promoting regeneration and change.

   b. Contain policies and, where appropriate, masterplans to optimise the use of allocated
      sites through:

                                                                                                   55
       i. Setting ambitious but deliverable expectations for the scale and density of
          development; and

       ii. Taking opportunities to secure multiple benefits, such as through mixed-use
           schemes which provide retail, employment, education and community facilities that
           help reduce the need to travel, or securing net environmental gains (for example
           by enabling significant new habitat creation or improving public access to the
           countryside).

   c. Not reallocate land for its previously identified purpose where there is no reasonable
      expectation that the use will come forward within the plan period, and consider
      whether allocation for an alternative use is appropriate instead.

2. Mayors and local planning authorities should take a proactive role in identifying and
   helping to bring forward land that may be suitable for meeting development needs,
   including suitable sites on brownfield registers or held in public ownership, using the full
   range of powers available to them. This should include identifying opportunities to
   facilitate land assembly, supported where necessary by compulsory purchase powers,
   where this can help to bring more land forward for meeting development needs and/or
   secure better development outcomes.

3. The extent to which development plans are making as much use as possible of previously
   developed land and using minimum densities to accommodate their identified
   development need will be tested robustly when plans are examined.

National decision-making policies
L2: Making effective use of land

1. Substantial weight should be given to the benefits where a development proposal would
   achieve one or more of the following:

   a. Remediating despoiled, degraded, derelict, contaminated or unstable land;

   b. Making better use of vacant and underutilised land and buildings (such as: by bringing
      back into residential use empty homes and other suitable buildings; converting space
      above shops; redeveloping underutilised retail and business sites; and building on or
      above service yards, lock-ups, car parks and other transport infrastructure which are
      no longer required);

   c. Making effective use of previously developed land and buildings through temporary
      uses, in situations where alternative development is anticipated within a reasonable
      period (including as a result of the land being allocated for an alternative purpose in
      the development plan); or

   d. Creating additional homes or floorspace within settlements by using the airspace
      above existing residential and commercial premises, or through sensitive
      redevelopment or additional development within existing plots (including, but not
      limited to, the addition of mansard roofs, proposals to fill gaps in the existing roof line,

                                                                                                  56
        the introduction of higher buildings at street corners and additional units within
        residential curtilages). Such proposals should:

        i. Be consistent with the overall street scene, other than where: it is appropriate to
           have larger buildings (such as at street corners, or where building upwards would
           not cause substantial harm to the character of a building and its surroundings); the
           development would not be visible from the street frontage; or where specific
           changes are provided for through a design code which forms part of the
           development plan;

        ii. Maintain safe access and egress for occupiers and users, and acceptable living
            standards for residents and neighbours in terms of access to daylight, sunlight,
            privacy and external amenity space; and

        iii. Where the development would involve the use of residential curtilages, not occupy
             more than twice the footprint of all the existing buildings on the site, and, following
             development, would retain at least 50% of the non-developed area within the
             curtilage of the existing buildings38; unless additional development can be
             accommodated without harm to the overall character of the area, and taking into
             account the availability of infrastructure and the importance of locating
             development in sustainable locations (in accordance with policy TR3).

2. A condition of simultaneous development should not be imposed on an application for
   multiple upward extensions unless there is a clear justification.

L3: Achieving appropriate densities

1. Development proposals should make efficient use of land, taking into account the
   identified need for different types of housing and other development, local market
   conditions, the availability of infrastructure (including that supporting sustainable transport
   modes) and its scope for improvement, a site’s connectivity and the importance of
   securing well-designed, attractive and healthy places.

2. To contribute to making efficient use of land:

    a. Within settlements, development proposals for residential and mixed-use development
       should contribute to an increase in the density of the area in which they are situated.
       The only exception is where there is a clear justification that this is either inappropriate
       or not possible (for example, where the prevailing density is already very high, the
       nature of the accommodation required precludes higher densities, or where it would
       conflict with other policies in this Framework). In considering the potential to increase
       densities, the existing character of an area should be taken into account, in
       accordance with policy DP3, but should not preclude development which makes the
       most of an area's potential;

    b. Outside settlements, and on land at the edge of existing built-up areas which is
       allocated or has permission for development and so will form part of a settlement (as
       defined in the glossary at Annex B), development footprints should make the best use

38 The existing buildings are to be assessed as the buildings as existing on the date of the publication of this

Framework.
                                                                                                                   57
       of a site’s development potential, taking into account the policies in this Framework;
       and

   c. Where development proposals for residential or mixed-use schemes are within
      reasonable walking distance of a well-connected station (applying the definitions in the
      glossary at Annex B), a density of at least 35 dwellings per hectare should be
      achieved within the net developable area of the site. Higher densities – of at least 45
      dwellings per hectare – should be achieved where the service frequency is at least
      twice that of the minimum required for a well-connected station. Exceptions to meeting
      these minimum standards should be made only in the case of:

       i. Sites which fall below the threshold for major development where it can be
          demonstrated that meeting the standard is either inappropriate or not possible; or

       ii. Development for traveller sites.

3. The minimum densities in paragraph 2(c) of this policy should be exceeded where
   possible, especially in areas of high connectivity, to optimise the efficient use of land. The
   Connectivity Tool (Connectivity Tool - GOV.UK) should be used alongside other relevant
   quantitative or qualitative evidence in assessing the connectivity of particular locations
   proposed for development.

4. Development proposals that do not make efficient use of land in accordance with
   paragraph 2 of this policy should be refused.




                                                                                                58
13. Protecting Green Belt land
 The objective of Green Belt policy, as set out in this chapter, is to prevent urban sprawl by
 keeping land permanently open. The government attaches great importance to Green
 Belts, the essential features of which are their openness and permanence.

Plan-making policies
GB1: Establishing new Green Belts

1. As the general extent of Green Belt land across the country is already established, new
   Green Belts should be established only in exceptional circumstances, for example when
   planning for new settlements or major urban extensions. Any proposals to establish new
   Green Belts in development plans should demonstrate:

   a. Whether major changes in circumstances exist which make establishing a new Green
      Belt necessary as an exceptional measure;

   b. Why normal planning and development policies would be inadequate for addressing
      these circumstances; and

   c. That it would be compatible with long-term growth ambitions, including those beyond
      the plan period, for the relevant area.

GB2: Assessing existing Green Belt land

1. The preparation of spatial development strategies should be informed by an assessment
   of the strategic role of Green Belt land within the strategy area. This strategic Green Belt
   assessment should take into account the five purposes of the Green Belt, which are to:

   a. Check the unrestricted sprawl of large built-up areas;

   b. Prevent neighbouring towns merging into one another;

   c. Assist in safeguarding the countryside from encroachment;

   d. Preserve the setting and special character of historic towns; and

   e. Assist urban regeneration by encouraging the recycling of derelict and other urban
      land.

2. The strategic assessment should be used to help develop the spatial development
   strategy and to identify whether there are areas where Green Belt boundaries may
   require further consideration through the preparation of local plans.

3. The preparation of local plans should be informed by an assessment, conducted in
   accordance with the process at Annex E, which identifies grey belt and informs any Green
   Belt boundary alterations which accord with policy GB3.



                                                                                                 59
GB3: Altering existing Green Belt boundaries

1. Green Belt boundaries should only be altered through the preparation and updating of
   local plans and where exceptional circumstances are fully evidenced and justified (other
   than where paragraph 4 of this policy applies).

2. Exceptional circumstances in this context include a local planning authority being unable
   to meet its identified need for development in full, having examined all other reasonable
   options for doing so, including:

   a. Making as much use as possible of suitable previously developed and underutilised
      land;

   b. Optimising the density of development in accordance with policy L1; and

   c. Assessing whether sufficient suitable sites can be identified outside the Green Belt.

3. If a local planning authority wishes to make an exceptional, limited alteration to the
   defined Green Belt boundary (which might be to accommodate a site inset within the
   Green Belt) to meet a specific, identified need for a traveller site, it should be specifically
   allocated in the development plan as a traveller site only.

4. Where a development plan’s spatial strategy has identified suitable land around well-
   connected stations for development, exceptional circumstances do not need to be
   demonstrated to justify altering Green Belt boundaries.

GB4: Defining Green Belt boundaries

1. When defining Green Belt boundaries, whether as a result of altering or establishing
   Green Belts, local plans39 should:

   a. Only include land which it is necessary to keep permanently open as Green Belt;

   b. Include villages within the Green Belt where it is necessary to restrict development
      because of the important contribution the open character of the village makes to the
      openness of the Green Belt. Such villages should not be identified as ‘settlements’ for
      the purpose of the spatial strategy in the development plan;

   c. Use other, more relevant, policy approaches, such as conservation area designation
      where the character of a village needs to be protected for other reasons;

   d. Demonstrate that new Green Belt boundaries are broadly consistent with the spatial
      strategy for accommodating growth and meeting development needs across the plan
      area and adjoining areas, including those of any relevant spatial development
      strategies. This includes ensuring that any alterations to Green Belt boundaries
      promote sustainable patterns of development, including by:

       i. Giving priority to the release of previously developed land within the Green Belt,
          then to grey belt land which is not previously developed, and then other Green Belt
39 Or neighbourhood plans where a need for changes to Green Belt boundaries has been established but not

made in local plans, in which case detailed amendments to those boundaries may be made through
neighbourhood plans.
                                                                                                           60
          locations, so long as this promotes a sustainable pattern of development overall;
          and

      ii. Not proposing alterations where there is clear evidence these alterations would
          fundamentally undermine the purposes (taken together) of the remaining Green
          Belt when considered across the area of the plan.

   e. Ensure that allocations for major development involving the provision of housing on
      land released from the Green Belt can meet the Golden Rules, as set out in policy
      GB8, and that these requirements are set out within the local plan;

   f. Ensure Green Belt boundaries are defined clearly, using physical features that are
      readily recognisable and likely to be defensible; and

   g. Identify areas of safeguarded land, where necessary to meet longer-term development
      needs well beyond the plan period. It should be made clear that safeguarded land is
      not allocated for development at the present time (and does not form part of
      settlements), and that its status will change only when the plan is updated and
      proposes that the land is released for development.

GB5: Beneficial uses of Green Belt land

1. Green Belt land should provide benefits for communities and nature, which means that
   the development plan should, at the most appropriate level, set out:

   a. Opportunities to improve the environmental quality, secure improved public access to
      greenspace, including for outdoor sport or recreation, allotments and community food
      production, within the Green Belt;

   b. How the Green Belt can contribute to the priorities for nature recovery set out within
      relevant Local Nature Recovery Strategies; and

   c. Opportunities to support the objectives of the National Forest, England’s Community
      Forests and Protected Landscapes, where these lie wholly or partly within the Green
      Belt.

National decision-making policies
GB6: Control of development in the Green Belt

1. Development in the Green Belt is inappropriate unless it falls within one of the categories
   in policy GB7.

2. Inappropriate development is, by definition, harmful to the Green Belt and should not be
   approved except in very special circumstances. Such circumstances will not exist unless
   the potential harm to the Green Belt by reason of inappropriateness and any other harm
   resulting from the proposed development, is clearly outweighed by other
   considerations. In making this assessment, substantial weight should be given to the
   harm to the Green Belt which would be caused, including harm to its openness.



                                                                                               61
3. In the case of proposals for renewable and low carbon energy development, very special
   circumstances may include the wider environmental benefits associated with increased
   production of energy from renewable sources.

GB7: Development which is not inappropriate in the Green Belt

1. The following categories of development are not inappropriate in the Green Belt, and
   therefore should not be regarded as harmful to the Green Belt or be required to
   demonstrate very special circumstances:

    a. Development which is for agriculture, horticulture and forestry, or which is solely for
       nature conservation, restoration and/or enhancement;

    b. The reuse, extension, alteration or replacement of an existing building, provided that
       the existing building is of permanent and substantial construction, is lawful in planning
       terms, and any extension or alteration will not result in a disproportionate increase in
       size compared to the original building40. In the case of proposals for a replacement
       building, it should be for the same use and not materially larger than the one it
       replaces;

    c. Limited infilling in villages lying within the Green Belt;

    d. Limited affordable housing for local community needs under policies set out in this
       Framework or the development plan (for instance, on a rural exception site);

    e. The redevelopment of previously developed land (including a material change of use
       to residential or mixed-use including residential), which would not cause substantial
       harm to the openness of the Green Belt;

    f. Certain other forms of development, provided the impact on the openness of the
       Green Belt is minimised, and there would not be a significant conflict with the Green
       Belt purposes. These are:

        i. Mineral extraction and processing, engineering operations, and transport,
           electricity network, water and telecommunications infrastructure required in a
           Green Belt location);

        ii. Development brought forward under a Community Right to Build Order or
            Neighbourhood Development Order;

        iii. Material changes in the use of land (such as changes of use for outdoor sport or
             recreation, or for cemeteries and burial grounds); and

        iv. The provision of appropriate facilities (in connection with the existing use of land or
            a change of use), including buildings, for outdoor sport, outdoor recreation,
            cemeteries and burial grounds and allotments.

    g. Development where all of the following apply:


40 The original building for this purpose is the building that existed on 1 July 1948 or, if constructed after 1 July

1948, as it was built originally.
                                                                                                                    62
        i. The development would utilise grey belt land and would not fundamentally
           undermine the purposes (taken together) of the remaining Green Belt across the
           area of the plan;

        ii. There is an evidenced unmet need for the type of development proposed41;

        iii. The development would be in a sustainable location, with particular reference
             to policy TR3 of this Framework42; and

        iv. In the case of major development involving the provision of housing, the
            development proposed complies with policy GB8.

    h. Residential or mixed-use development which would:

        i. Be within reasonable walking distance of a well-connected station (applying the
           definitions in the glossary at Annex B);

        ii. Be physically well-related to the station or the settlement within which the station is
            located;

        iii. Be of a scale which can be accommodated taking into account the existing or
             proposed availability of infrastructure;

        iv. Not prejudice any proposals for long-term comprehensive development in the
            same location; and

        v. In the case of proposals for major development, comply with policy GB8.

GB8: The Golden Rules

1. Where major development involving the provision of housing is proposed on land
   released from the Green Belt through plan preparation or review, or on sites in the Green
   Belt subject to a planning application, all of the following contributions (‘Golden Rules’)
   should be made43:

    a. Affordable housing which reflects either:

        i. Development plan policy requirements for major development on land within or
           released from the Green Belt (as established under policy HO5(1)(a)(ii)); or

        ii. Until such policies are in place, a contribution which is 15 percentage points above
            the highest existing affordable housing requirement which would otherwise apply to
41 Which, in the case of applications involving the provision of housing, means the lack of a five year supply of

deliverable housing sites, including the relevant buffer where applicable, or where the Housing Delivery Test
result was below 75% of the housing requirement over the previous three years; and in the case of traveller
sites means the relevant local planning authority cannot demonstrate a five year supply of deliverable traveller
sites.
42 In the case of development proposals involving the provision of traveller sites, particular reference should

instead be made to policy HO12.
43 The Golden Rules do not apply to: (a) developments brought forward on land released from the Green Belt

through plans adopted prior to 12 December 2024; (b) developments that were granted planning permission on
Green Belt land prior to 12 December 2024; or (c) Traveller sites.
                                                                                                                63
            the development, subject to a cap of a 50%44. In the absence of a preexisting
            requirement for affordable housing, a 50% affordable housing contribution should
            apply by default.

    b. Necessary improvements to local or national infrastructure; and

    c. The provision of new green space, or improvements to existing green space, which is
       accessible to the public. New residents should be able to access good quality green
       spaces within a short walk of their homes, whether through on-site provision or
       through access to offsite spaces. This provision should:

        i. Make a positive contribution to the landscape setting of the development;

        ii. Support nature recovery; and

        iii. Meet local standards for green space provision where these exist in the
             development plan. Where no locally-specific standards exist, development
             proposals should meet national standards relevant to the development (these
             include Natural England’s standards on accessible green space and urban
             greening factor and Green Flag criteria). Where land has been identified as having
             potential for habitat creation or nature recovery within Local Nature Recovery
             Strategies, proposals should contribute towards these outcomes.

2. In considering applications for major development involving the provision of housing on
   land released from the Green Belt through plan preparation or review, or on sites in the
   Green Belt subject to a planning application, substantial weight should be given to the
   importance of complying with the Golden Rules.

3. There are three circumstances in which a viability assessment demonstrating that it would
   not be possible for a development to comply with the Golden Rules may be submitted as
   part of a development proposal. These circumstances are where the development
   proposal is:

    a. On previously developed land and demonstrably burdened by costs associated with
       that previous development which were not taken into account in the viability
       assessment that informed the development plan;

    b. For a strategic site; or

    c. For a development which is of a wholly different type to that considered in the viability
       assessment that informed the development plan.

4. Where the circumstances in paragraph 3 of this policy apply, development proposals
   should still make the maximum possible contribution to affordable housing and other
   infrastructure requirements. Development proposals which provide contributions
   significantly below those set out at (1)(a)(i) or (a)(ii) of this policy will only be acceptable in
   exceptional cases where fully evidenced and justified.

44 The 50% cap does not apply to rural exception sites or community-led development exception sites, or if the

local planning authority has a relevant existing policy which would apply to the development which exceeds
50%.
                                                                                                             64
14. Achieving well-designed places
 The objective of the policies in this chapter is to promote high quality, healthy, inclusive
 and sustainable places, through setting clear expectations about design outcomes and the
 use of relevant tools and processes.

Plan-making policies
DP1: A strategy for design

1. Development plans should, at the most appropriate level, set out clear design
   expectations by:

   a. Ensuring the vision for the plan reflects the desired design and placemaking
      outcomes. This should be informed by an evaluation of the area’s existing
      characteristics and potential, and proactive engagement with communities and other
      interests;

   b. Identifying where design guides, design codes and masterplans are necessary to
      deliver design and placemaking outcomes, such as for significant site allocations and
      areas of change (e.g. town centres, regeneration areas and suburban areas where
      there is scope for intensification);

   c. Setting out locally-specific design policies or standards which are necessary to add
      further detail to the principles in policy DP3, in response to particular local issues
      which will benefit from clear design expectations; and

   d. Setting out in what circumstances design review and other design processes will be
      required.

2. Guidance on applying this policy is set out in the Design and Placemaking planning
   practice guidance.

DP2: Local design guides, design codes and masterplans

1. Where design guides, design codes and masterplans are necessary, these design tools
   should:

   a. Reflect a clear understanding of and address the character of the site or area which
      they cover, the wider context and opportunities to strengthen existing character;

   b. Be informed by an understanding of the economic, social and environmental context
      and conditions for implementation, including through effective community engagement
      so that local aspirations are taken into account;

   c. Include a level of detail and degree of prescription proportionate to the circumstances
      and scale of change proposed; and

   d. Be supported by monitoring and review processes that allow for necessary
      adjustments in the light of implementation.

                                                                                               65
2. Model Design Codes can support the preparation of local design codes and should be
   used for this purpose where they exist for relevant development types.

National decision-making policies
DP3: Key principles for well-designed places

1. Development proposals should respond to their context (the history, character and
   features of their site and its setting), so that they integrate with and enhance their
   surroundings; such as through the arrangement of development plots and buildings, the
   use of materials and architectural features, and the restoration, reuse and integration of
   heritage assets. This should not preclude innovation or change where appropriate,
   especially where an increased scale or density of development is justified in accordance
   with policies L2 and L3.

2. To create well-designed places, development proposals should also reflect relevant
   aspects of the following principles, as appropriate to the nature of the development and its
   location45:

    a. Liveability: support healthy, mixed, vibrant and integrated communities, which will
       function well over the lifetime of the development, by incorporating a range of uses
       and tenures, employing features which promote social interaction, and which are
       robust, durable and easy to look after;

    b. Climate: contribute to climate change mitigation and adaptation and the transition to
       net zero by using building layouts, building orientation, massing, landscaping and
       materials which conserve energy and other resources, and which minimise risks from
       the impacts of climate change including overheating;

    c. Nature: incorporate and/or connect to a network of high quality, accessible, multi-
       functional green infrastructure to provide opportunities for recreation and healthy
       living, strengthen habitats, improve climate change resilience and improve air and
       water quality. This should include maintaining and enhancing tree cover and
       incorporating sustainable drainage systems in accordance with policies N3 and F8;

    d. Movement: provide transport infrastructure and choices which support the design
       vision for the site, provide good connections to the wider settlement (or those nearby),
       and prioritise walking, wheeling, cycling and public transport;

    e. Built Form: use the pattern of buildings to define the arrangement of streets, squares
       and other spaces, promote compact forms of development to optimise the site’s
       potential, distinguish between public and private areas, create focal points and, where
       appropriate, enhance views into and out of the scheme;

    f. Public Space: include spaces that are safe, secure, inclusive, and accessible for all
       ages and abilities, including for groups such as women and girls; and which facilitate
       and encourage social interaction, play and healthy lifestyles (for example by providing
       high quality, clear and legible pedestrian and cycle routes, a variety of recreational

45 Principles for creating well-designed places are described more fully in Part 1 of the Design and Placemaking

planning practice guidance, points a to g in this policy forming the seven features of well-designed places
described in the guidance, all of which are informed by context (paragraph 1).
                                                                                                              66
      spaces and places to meet, integrating lighting and making building entrances and
      windows face onto streets and other public spaces to provide natural surveillance);
      and

   g. Identity: create visually attractive, distinctive and characterful development to establish
      or maintain a strong sense of place and pride, including through the use of a coherent
      palette of materials, design features and planting.

3. Development proposals should be refused if, without clear justification, they conflict with
   paragraph 1 of this policy or relevant aspects of the principles in paragraph 2, or with any
   explicit design standards set out in the development plan (including those in locally-
   specific policies, guides, codes or masterplans). Substantial weight should be given to
   compliance with relevant development plan policies when assessing the design quality of
   proposals.

4. The principles set out in the Design and Placemaking planning practice guidance should
   be used to inform how this policy is applied in the absence of locally-produced design
   policies, guides, codes or masterplans.

5. Substantial weight should also be given to outstanding or innovative designs which
   promote high levels of sustainability, or which help raise the standard of design more
   generally in an area, so long as they are consistent with the overall form and layout of
   their surroundings.

DP4: The design process

1. Design quality should be considered throughout the evolution, assessment and delivery of
   development proposals, including through any pre-application engagement; as outlined in
   Part 2 of the Design and Placemaking planning practice guidance.

2. The local planning authority should:

   a. Ensure that they have access to, and encourage the appropriate use of design review
      and other design tools and processes (especially for strategic sites and other
      significant projects), and take into account their outcomes, including any design
      recommendations made by design review panels;

   b. Ensure that relevant planning conditions refer to clear and accurate plans and
      drawings which provide visual clarity about the design of the development, including
      the approved use of materials where appropriate; and

   c. Not allow the quality of approved development to be materially diminished between
      permission and completion, as a result of changes proposed following its initial
      approval (for example through changes to approved details).




                                                                                              67
15. Promoting sustainable transport
 The objective of the policies in this chapter is to ensure that transport considerations are
 taken fully into account in the preparation of development plans and the evolution and
 assessment of development proposals; using a vision-led approach to embed the role that
 transport infrastructure and choices can play in creating well-designed, sustainable,
 inclusive and popular places.

Plan-making policies
TR1: Vision-led approach to planning for transport

1. Sustainable transport should be considered from the earliest stages of plan-making, so
   that it is reflected in the vision for the plan area and its specific proposals, and forms an
   integral part of a plan’s strategy for creating well-designed, sustainable, inclusive and
   popular places. This should be done by:

   a. Making sustainable transport considerations part of early engagement with local
      communities, highway and transport authorities, transport infrastructure providers,
      operators, land promoters and neighbouring councils. This is so that proposals reflect
      local views, evidence relating to accessibility, capacity and transport service provision,
      and take opportunities for prioritising and maximising sustainable movement across
      the area. Plans should align land use policies and allocations with wider strategies
      (such as Local Transport Plans, Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plans and
      Rights of Way Improvement Plans) and investments in transport to ensure that the
      potential impacts of development on transport networks are understood and
      addressed;

   b. Locating proposed development where it can support sustainable patterns of
      movement and make effective use of existing or proposed transport infrastructure,
      reflecting the principles in policy TR3. The Connectivity Tool (Connectivity Tool -
      GOV.UK) should be used to inform the assessment and selection of sites for
      development alongside other relevant quantitative or qualitative evidence;

   c. Supporting an appropriate mix of uses across the plan area, and within strategic sites,
      to minimise the number and length of journeys needed for employment, shopping,
      leisure, education and other activities;

   d. Identifying and protecting sites and routes which will widen transport choice and are
      essential to facilitate sustainable development, including networks for walking,
      wheeling and cycling, and public transport infrastructure; and

   e. Providing for any transport facilities that need to be located in the area, or for their
      necessary expansion or adaptation, and the infrastructure and wider development
      required to support them. This includes uses such as ports, airports, lorry parking
      facilities, freight interchanges, public transport hubs, roadside services, electric vehicle
      charging and bus and rail depots. In doing so plan-makers should consider whether
      such development is likely to be a nationally significant infrastructure project and any
      relevant national policy statements, and the importance of maintaining a national
      network of aviation airfields.

                                                                                                   68
2. Spatial development strategies and local plans may set thresholds for what constitutes a
   significant amount of movement arising from new development, based on the
   circumstances of their areas, for the purposes of applying policies TR3 and TR6.

TR2: Local parking standards

1. Development plans should set local parking standards for residential and non-residential
   development, across the plan area or for specific sites or sub-areas, in a way which aligns
   with the transport vision for the plan and opportunities to promote sustainable transport.

2. Maximum standards for car parking should be set where they will support efforts to
   encourage the use of sustainable transport modes and shared transport, optimise the
   density of development in well-connected locations, or where they are necessary for
   managing the local road network.

3. Parking standards should take into account:

   a. The connectivity of development in different locations by different modes of transport,
      especially in terms of access to employment and day-to-day services;

   b. Opportunities for improvements in walking, wheeling, cycling and public transport;

   c. Local car ownership levels and travel trends, and opportunities to promote car sharing
      and other schemes which may reduce vehicle parking requirements;

   d. Providing sufficient spaces for electric vehicle charging, blue badge holders, pedal and
      electric cycles and e-scooters, considering likely future demand and the need for
      associated infrastructure; and

   e. The appropriateness of setting different standards for the type and mix of
      development, including to address specific business requirements where commercial
      standards are being set; and of using ranges where a degree of flexibility is desirable.

National decision-making policies
TR3: Locating development in sustainable locations

1. So that development is located where it can support sustainable patterns of movement,
   enable good accessibility for different users and make the most of existing and proposed
   transport infrastructure, development proposals should reflect the following principles,
   taking into account the vision for the site, the type of development and its location:

   a. Development proposals which could generate a significant amount of movement, in
      the context of the area within which they would be situated, should be in locations that
      are sustainable (or which can be made so, taking into account planned improvements,
      including any provided for as part of the development itself). This means the location
      should limit the need to travel, particularly by private car, and offer a genuine choice of
      transport modes for residents and users, unless the nature of the development would
      make this impractical;

   b. Opportunities should be taken to utilise existing or proposed transport infrastructure in
      optimising the amount or density of development which can be accommodated in
                                                                                              69
       different locations, especially where this can support more walking, wheeling, cycling
       and public transport use;

   c. Any significant adverse impacts from the development on the transport network (in
      terms of capacity and congestion), or on highway safety, should be mitigated to an
      acceptable degree using a vision-led approach;

   d. The environmental impacts of traffic and transport infrastructure should be identified,
      assessed and taken into account – including taking opportunities to avoid or mitigate
      any adverse environmental effects, and to secure net environmental gains such as
      reductions in air pollution; and

   e. In rural areas, opportunities to improve walking, wheeling, cycling and public transport
      and enhance the connectivity of an area should be taken where they exist and can be
      supported by the development proposed.

2. The Connectivity Tool (Connectivity Tool - GOV.UK) should be used alongside other
   relevant quantitative or qualitative evidence in assessing the connectivity of particular
   locations proposed for development.

TR4: Street design, access and parking

1. To contribute to creating well-designed places, transport considerations should be integral
   to the design of development, proposals for which should:

   a. Give priority first to walking, wheeling and cycle movements, both within the scheme
      and with neighbouring areas; and second – so far as possible – to facilitating easy
      access to high quality public transport, with layouts and densities which maximise the
      catchments for bus or other public transport services;

   b. Incorporate or contribute towards appropriate features to support this prioritisation,
      such as permeable street networks, continuous footways and segregated cycle
      facilities which are adequately lit, sufficient secure and accessible cycle parking,
      regularly spaced public seating and good quality waiting facilities for public transport;

   c. Ensure that the arrangement of streets and other routes help to create places that are
      safe, inclusive and attractive for all users (particularly for women and girls, for other
      groups who may be vulnerable to crime or the fear of crime, and for those with limited
      mobility). This includes reflecting relevant aspects of policy DP3(2), as well as
      employing measures to:

       i. Minimise the scope for conflict between pedestrians, cyclists and vehicles;

       ii. Meet the needs of disabled people, older people and children in relation to all
           modes of transport, and

       iii. Avoid unnecessary street clutter.

   d. Allow for the efficient delivery of goods, and ease of access by service and emergency
      vehicles, in ways which do not compromise key place-making principles (set out in
      policy DP3(2)); and


                                                                                               70
    e. Provide a suitable number of parking spaces for a range of transport modes where
       appropriate, reflecting the location and nature of the development (including its
       connectivity), any locally-set standards in the development plan, and including
       adequate provision of spaces and infrastructure that allow for the charging of electric
       vehicles in safe, accessible and convenient locations. A flexible approach to applying
       parking standards should be taken where the reconfiguration of retail or other sites
       which attract large numbers of customers would make better use of previously
       developed land, and there is evidence that a certain number of spaces needs to be
       retained to meet specific operational and commercial requirements.

2. The principles set out in national design guidance 46 should be used to inform how this
   policy is applied.

TR5: Roadside facilities

1. Development proposals for roadside facilities located outside settlements should:

    a. Meet an evidenced need to improve the safety and welfare of road users, or to
       improve access to electric vehicle charging infrastructure or other alternative fuels, if
       new or significantly expanded facilities are being proposed. This includes the provision
       of overnight lorry parking facilities to address any local or wider shortages and reduce
       the risk of parking in locations which lack appropriate facilities or could cause a
       nuisance; or

    b. Improve driver welfare and security, support changes in transport technology, or
       improve environmental impacts (such as through the facility’s design, landscaping or
       measures to support climate change mitigation), where the proposal is to upgrade
       existing facilities without significant expansion.

2. Development proposals should not result in the loss of existing roadside facilities unless
   alternative provision with good access to the strategic transport network is being provided
   in the local area, or it can be shown that the facility is no longer needed or viable.

TR6: Assessing transport impacts

1. Development proposals that are likely to generate significant amounts of movement
   should be supported by:

    a. A transport statement or transport assessment (depending on the extent and
       significance of the transport issues involved), which is proportionate to the nature and
       scale of the development, so that the likely impacts of the proposal for transport can
       be assessed and monitored; and

    b. A travel plan, which indicates how sustainable transport objectives will be delivered,
       monitored and managed over time.

2. Transport assessments and statements, and travel plans, should reflect the transport
   vision for the development and the transport strategy for the area in which it is located,
   and how these are intended to be achieved (including, in the case of travel plans,
   identifying fallback options if initial measures do not deliver the expected outcomes).
46 Manual for streets published in: Designing and modifying residential streets: Manual for streets - GOV.UK and

the Design and Placemaking planning practice guidance.
                                                                                                             71
3. In assessing movement patterns and potential impacts, including whether they are
   considered to be severe, reasonable future scenarios should be considered, taking into
   account impacts at relevant times of the day, potential cumulative impacts, multimodal trip
   generation and the promotion of sustainable modes of travel, and realising the transport
   vision for the development itself. Development proposals should be considered having
   regard to these potential impacts and the other policies in this Framework which are
   relevant (including TR3, TR4 and DP3(2)(d)).

4. Development proposals should be refused if they would have a severe adverse impact on
   the transport network (in terms of capacity and congestion, including cumulative impacts),
   or an unacceptable impact on highway safety; taking into account any mitigation
   measures proposed as well as any wider network improvements, including measures to
   support sustainable patterns of movement. This applies both during the construction
   phase and following completion.

TR7: Marine ports, airports and other aviation facilities

1. Development proposals involving the provision, expansion or alteration of port, airport,
   advanced air mobility and aviation facilities47 (and development ancillary to them) should:

    a. Facilitate the modernisation, diversification and improvement of facilities, including
       through innovation in the handling of goods and passengers, and the transition to zero
       emission vehicles and the use of low and zero carbon fuels; or

    b. Be for a freight and logistics use which accords with policy E3; or

    c. Help to maintain a national network of aviation airfields, and support an airfield’s
       economic or public service role (for example in serving business, leisure, training and
       emergency service needs).

2. All development proposals to which this policy applies should have an acceptable
   environmental effect in terms of noise, air quality, greenhouse gas emissions, the
   transport network, landscape, visual and marine impacts, taking into account any
   applicable standards and relevant national decision-making policies in this Framework.

TR8: Public rights of way

1. Development proposals should:

    a. Protect and enhance the network of public rights of way, including through suitable
       diversions agreed with the highway authority; and

    b. Take opportunities to extend, link or improve the quality of existing routes where this
       enables one or more of the following:

        i. Improved access to green spaces and the countryside;

        ii. New direct and circular routes and connections between local and long-distance
            footpaths, bridleways and cycle routes;

47 Including new technologies, for example droneports, vertiports and other autonomous vehicle facilities.

                                                                                                             72
iii. The provision of accessible, safe and convenient links to services and facilities;
     and

iv. Improved connections with public transport stops and interchanges.




                                                                                          73
16. Promoting healthy communities
 The objective of the policies in this chapter is to promote the creation of healthy and
 inclusive places and support the provision of appropriate public services, by enabling
 development which can support this aim and seeking to retain, improve and deliver new
 facilities which are important for community wellbeing and minimising inequalities.

Plan-making policies
HC1: Planning for healthy communities

1. To promote the creation of healthy and inclusive places, and the provision, retention and
   enhancement of appropriate community facilities and public service infrastructure,
   development plans should, at the most appropriate level:

    a. Be informed by an understanding of any existing deficits in the availability of
       community facilities and public service infrastructure, and additional requirements
       expected over the plan period, arising from proposed development and wider changes
       in the local population and public service provision. In doing so, they should take into
       account both quantitative and qualitative aspects of provision, identified local health
       needs and opportunities to reduce inequalities through the availability of facilities;

    b. Set out the facilities and contributions expected from development, including as part of
       allocations for major development involving the provision of housing;

    c. Allocate land specifically for community facilities and public service infrastructure
       where it is appropriate to do so, and assess whether any land is suitable for
       designation as Local Green Space in accordance with policy HC2;

    d. Set local standards for the provision of different types of recreational land and
       facilities, including for play, sport, informal recreation and allotments. In doing so plans
       should draw upon relevant national standards and best practice, tailoring these as
       necessary to local circumstances and evidence48. Policies for play and informal
       recreation should aim to secure a connected network of high quality, inclusive and
       accessible opportunities as part of the wider network of green space provision,
       secured through both on-site provision in conjunction with land allocated for
       development and through other contributions and investment; and

    e. Identify wider opportunities to promote good health, prevent ill-health, reduce health
       inequalities and support social interaction through their spatial strategy and land
       allocations, including through policies for strengthening town centres, locating
       development where it will support walking, wheeling and cycling and promoting mixed-
       use developments.

2. In planning for community facilities and public service infrastructure, authorities should
   engage proactively with local communities and relevant service providers, taking into
48 These include the suite of Green Infrastructure Standards for England published by Natural England

(https://designatedsites.naturalengland.org.uk/GreenInfrastructure/GIStandards.aspx), standards for open
space, outdoor sport and play recommended by Fields in Trust (https://fieldsintrust.org/insights/standards) and
published Sport England Guidance (including Assessing Needs and Playing Pitch Strategy guidance | Sport
England).
                                                                                                              74
    account relevant strategies to improve health, address inequalities and foster social and
    cultural well-being for all sections of the community. Authorities should attach
    considerable importance to providing for sufficient education facilities (including early
    years, school and post-16 provision), all types of health care provision and other essential
    community facilities and public service infrastructure over the plan period, in a way that
    aligns with the needs of the local population and any wider requirements for
    improvements in public service infrastructure identified by the government or public
    agencies (recognising that some public service infrastructure serves a larger than local
    population).

HC2: Local Green Space

1. Local and neighbourhood plans may designate land as Local Green Space where this
   would safeguard green areas of particular value to the local community. Local Green
   Space should be limited to situations where the land concerned is:

    a. In close proximity to the community it serves;

    b. Demonstrably special to a local community and holds a particular local significance,
       for example because of its beauty, historic significance, recreational value (including
       as a playing field), tranquillity or richness of its wildlife; and

    c. Local in character and not an extensive tract of land.

2. Designating land as Local Green Space should be consistent with the local planning of
   sustainable development and the provision of sufficient land for homes, jobs and other
   needs. Local Green Space should only be designated when a plan is prepared or
   updated, and should be capable of enduring beyond the end of the plan period.

National decision-making policies
HC3: Community facilities and public service infrastructure serving new development

1. Proposals for housing, employment or other development which would give rise to
   significant numbers of additional people living in, working in or visiting an area should:

    a. Be informed by an understanding of the need for any associated improvements to
       community facilities and public service infrastructure, whether on or off-site; and

    b. Provide for new or improved community facilities and public service infrastructure
       which are necessary for the development to be acceptable in planning terms, whether
       by direct provision or a contribution to off-site improvements (which may be through
       Community Infrastructure Levy payments, where applicable).

2. Where the development plan does not set locally-specific standards for recreational land
   and facilities, all development proposals should use relevant national standards and best
   practice49 to identify improvements in the quantity and quality of provision which should be
49 These include the suite of Green Infrastructure Standards for England published by Natural England

(https://designatedsites.naturalengland.org.uk/GreenInfrastructure/GIStandards.aspx), the standards for open
space, outdoor sport and play recommended by Fields in Trust (https://fieldsintrust.org/insights/standards) and
published Sport England Guidance (including Assessing Needs and Playing Pitch Strategy guidance | Sport
England).
                                                                                                              75
   provided or contributed towards, as appropriate to the nature of the development and
   taking into account existing levels of provision in the area.

3. Planning conditions and obligations should be used to secure the timely delivery of
   community facilities and public service infrastructure required to serve new development,
   so that these facilities are available for use when the development (or an agreed
   proportion of the development) is first occupied or comes into use.

HC4: Proposals for new and improved community facilities, public service
infrastructure and development providing public health benefits

1. Substantial weight should be given to the benefits where:

    a. New or improved public service infrastructure or community facilities would be
       provided; and

    b. Development proposals would make a demonstrable contribution towards promoting
       good health, preventing ill-health, reducing health inequalities or supporting social
       interaction in the local community (such as, but not limited to, the provision of new
       recreation facilities, meeting places and opportunities to grow or purchase healthier
       food).

2. Local planning authorities, developers and public service providers should collaborate in a
   positive and proactive manner to identify and resolve key planning issues before
   applications for community facilities and public services infrastructure are submitted.
   Where appropriate local communities should be engaged in the design of proposals,
   including children and families where new or improved facilities for play are involved so
   that developments are inclusive and reflect user needs.

HC5: Hot food takeaways

1. Development proposals for hot food takeaways should be refused:

   a. Within reasonable walking distance of schools and other places where children and
      young people congregate, unless the location is within a designated town centre; or

   b. In locations where there is evidence that a concentration of such uses is having an
      adverse impact on local health, pollution or anti-social-behaviour.

HC6: Retention of key community facilities and public service infrastructure

1. Development proposals should not result in the loss of key community facilities and public
   service infrastructure unless:

   a. It can be demonstrated that there is no reasonable prospect of the use being retained,
      either due to there being insufficient community support for the service it provides, or
      because it is no longer viable or feasible to operate (in the case of shops and public
      houses where commercial viability is an issue, evidence should be provided that
      reasonable steps have been taken to market the property for its existing use without
      success, for a period of at least 12 months); or

   b. The loss resulting from the proposed development would be replaced by equivalent or
                                                                                            76
       better provision, in a location which offers comparable or improved accessibility for the
       community it serves; or

   c. The decision-maker is satisfied that there is sufficient alternative provision of the type
      of use concerned in the local area, such that its loss will not diminish access to key
      community facilities and public service infrastructure.

2. For the purpose of this policy, key community facilities and public service infrastructure
   means established services that are used (or which have been used) on a frequent basis
   in a local area such as local shops, public houses, places of worship, local health
   facilities, community halls and cultural venues. It excludes recreational land and facilities
   which are addressed in policy HC7.

HC7: Development affecting existing recreational land and facilities

1. Development proposals should not result in the loss of existing open space, sports and
   recreational buildings and land, including playing fields, other formal and informal play
   space and allotments, unless:

   a. An assessment has been undertaken which has clearly shown the open space,
      buildings or land to be surplus to requirements; or

   b. The loss resulting from the proposed development would be replaced by equivalent or
      better provision in terms of quantity and quality, in a location which offers comparable
      or improved accessibility for the community it serves; or

   c. The development is for public service infrastructure, and the resulting loss would be
      replaced by equivalent or better provision in terms of quantity and/or quality; or

   d. The development is for alternative open space, sports and recreational buildings and
      land, the benefits of which clearly outweigh the loss of the current or former use.

HC8: Development affecting Local Green Space

1. Development proposals for land which has been designated as Local Green Space
   should be determined in a manner consistent with the relevant national decision-making
   policies for land in the Green Belt, excluding provisions relating to grey belt and
   previously developed land.




                                                                                               77
17. Pollution, public protection and security
 The objective of the policies in this chapter is to ensure that new development is
 appropriate for its location, taking into account risks posed by pollution and other hazards;
 that any impacts which development might have are taken into account; and that sufficient
 provision is made for development required for public safety and security.

Plan-making policies
P1: Planning for clean and safe places

1. To support efforts to avoid and mitigate risks from natural and man-made hazards,
   minimise levels of pollution and create clean, liveable and safe places for people to live,
   work and visit, development plans should:

   a. Allocate land for development where, taking into account the potential for mitigation:

       i. Opportunities can be taken to improve local environmental conditions, such as by
          remediating despoiled, degraded, derelict, contaminated and unstable land;

       ii. Ground conditions will not inhibit or pose a risk to the nature of the development
           proposed (such as due to land instability), and occupiers and users will not be put
           at risk from, or be adversely affected by, unacceptable levels of pollution;

       iii. Development proposals will not cause unacceptable levels of pollution, either alone
            or in combination with other pollution sources, taking into account communities
            which may be particularly vulnerable to its effects, such as children and older
            people, as well as habitats and species which may be vulnerable to pollution; and

       iv. The intended uses will not place unreasonable restrictions on the operation of
           existing businesses, community facilities, public services, defence and security
           activities.

   b. Consider any wider opportunities to reduce air, water, soil, noise or other forms of
      pollution, and contribute to compliance with national and local environmental targets
      and objectives, through the spatial strategy and policies for specific parts of the plan
      area (such as by identifying opportunities for strategic nature-based solutions);

   c. Identify whether restrictions on certain types or forms of development are necessary
      as a consequence of consultation zones around hazardous substances sites,
      safeguarding areas around aerodromes, technical sites or military explosives storage
      areas50, and consultation zones around nuclear sites51 (and reflect the implications of
      these areas in any allocations of land within the plan);


50 As identified through The Town and Country Planning (Safeguarded Aerodromes, Technical Sites and Military

Explosives Storage Areas) Direction 2002.
51 Including the existing Detailed Emergency Planning Zones and Outline Planning Zones, required under the

Radiation (Emergency Preparedness and Public Information) Regulations (REPPIR) 2019.
                                                                                                             78
    d. Identify other locations where natural or man-made hazards may influence the way in
       which land is allocated or developed. This includes (but is not limited to) town centres
       and other locations where large numbers of people are expected to congregate52, and
       Coastal Change Management Areas (policy F3); and

    e. Assess whether land needs to be allocated for development which is required to
       maintain public safety and security, including for the purposes of flood management in
       accordance with policy F2(1)(b) and national defence.

National decision-making policies
P2: Ground conditions

1. Sites proposed for development should be suitable for their proposed use taking into
   account:

    a. Ground conditions, including any risks arising from land instability or contamination
       (whether due to natural hazards or current and former activities such as mining or fuel
       storage); and

    b. The extent to which any such risks can be mitigated, and the potential impacts on the
       natural environment arising from remediation.

2. Where land is remediated it should, as a minimum, not be capable of being determined as
   contaminated land under Part IIA of the Environmental Protection Act 1990.

3. Adequate site assessment information, prepared by a competent person, should be
   available to inform these considerations.

4. Where a site is affected by contamination or land stability issues, responsibility for
   securing a safe development rests with the developer and/or landowner.

P3: Living conditions and pollution

1. Development proposals should be appropriate for their location, taking into account the
   likely effects (including cumulative effects) of pollution on health, living conditions and the
   natural environment, whether these effects are on or off-site; and whether this is as a
   result of the development itself or the product of preexisting conditions in its vicinity. In
   assessing the potential effects of pollution, consideration should be given to the potential
   sensitivity of the site, and its intended occupiers and users, as well as that of the
   environment and population in the surrounding area (including where certain groups could
   be particularly vulnerable to its effects, such as children and older people).

2. Within this context development proposals should:

    a. Provide healthy living conditions for occupiers and users in terms of adequate access
       to light and avoiding exposure to levels of air, noise, artificial light or other sources of
       pollution which could have an unacceptable adverse effect on health and the quality of


52 The considerations in policy P5(1)(b) are relevant in this context.

                                                                                                79
       life. Where necessary suitable mitigation measures should be incorporated to secure
       acceptable living conditions;

   b. Not give rise to, or contribute to, an unacceptable level of access to daylight and
      sunlight for neighbouring residents and occupiers, or unacceptable levels of air, noise,
      artificial light, water, soil or other forms of pollution on or beyond the site. Adverse
      impacts of this nature should be avoided where possible, or else mitigated to an
      acceptable degree. Where possible, opportunities should be taken to reduce pollution
      affecting the wider area (such as through traffic and travel management or improved
      external lighting);

   c. Sustain and contribute to compliance with relevant limit values or national objectives
      and targets for air pollutants including PM2.5. Development proposals should take
      account of Air Quality Management Areas and be consistent with the objectives of
      relevant Air Quality Action Plans, Clean Air Plans and Local Air Quality Strategies;

   d. Mitigate and reduce to a minimum potential adverse impacts resulting from noise, not
      result in levels of noise exposure which would have a significant observed adverse
      effect, and maintain the character of tranquil areas (those areas that have remained
      relatively undisturbed by noise from human sources and are prized for their
      recreational and amenity value for this reason);

   e. Limit any adverse impact from artificial light on local amenity, intrinsically dark
      landscapes (those areas entirely, or largely, uninterrupted by artificial light) and
      nature; and

   f. Assess and mitigate impacts where the development could have an unacceptable
      adverse effect on water quality, especially in relation to sensitive water bodies such as
      chalk streams.

3. In applying this policy, it should be assumed, unless there is clear evidence to the
   contrary, that separate regulatory regimes for the control of pollution will operate
   effectively, as set out in policy DM7. This means that it will be appropriate to take into
   account emissions limits set through those other regimes.

P4: Impact of development on existing activities

1. Existing businesses, community facilities, public services and defence and security
   activities should not have unreasonable restrictions placed on their current or permitted
   operation as a result of development being approved after they were established. This
   means that development proposals should be capable of being integrated effectively with
   existing business, community and public service activities and infrastructure in their
   vicinity (including, but not limited to, uses such as pubs, music venues, places of worship,
   sports clubs, blue light services, defence, electricity network infrastructure and industrial
   and waste sites).

2. Where the operation of an existing activity could have a significant adverse effect on a
   proposed new development in its vicinity, development proposals should:

   a. Identify the nature of the potential impacts, informed where necessary by early
      discussions between the applicant (i.e. the ‘agent of change’) and those existing uses
      which could be affected by the proposal to inform the scope for mitigation; and
                                                                                                80
    b. Be able to demonstrate that suitable mitigation can be provided before first occupation
       of the development, if it is to be acceptable. Planning conditions or obligations should
       be used to secure agreed mitigation measures.

3. This policy applies to new development involving changes of use of land and property, as
   well as to new construction, and includes situations where new development may
   interfere with the operation of electronic communications networks. Both lawful current
   and permitted levels of operation of existing activities should be taken into account when
   applying this policy.

P5: Maintaining public safety and security

1. Development proposals should anticipate and address possible malicious threats and
   other hazards (whether natural or man-made) in relation to:

    a. Their occupiers and users, by identifying potential safety risks and proportionate
       mitigation opportunities which can be addressed through the design of the scheme.
       This applies especially where particular groups may be vulnerable to crime, or to the
       fear of crime – such as women and girls – or would be at risk from physical hazards
       (such as children where open water or transport infrastructure is present or planned);

    b. Locations where large numbers of people are expected to congregate, such as
       transport hubs, night-time economy venues, cinemas and theatres, sports stadiums
       and arenas, shopping centres, health and education establishments, places of
       worship, hotels and restaurants, visitor attractions and commercial centres. Proposals
       for major development in such locations should be informed by the most up-to-date
       information available from the police and other relevant agencies about the nature of
       potential threats and their implications, and appropriate and proportionate steps that
       can be taken to reduce vulnerability, increase resilience and ensure public safety and
       security;

    c. Uses which could pose a potential hazard to the surrounding area. Development
       proposals involving new major hazard sites, changes to existing major hazard sites,
       major accident hazard pipelines and Health and Safety Executive licensed explosive
       sites (as identified within Health and Safety Executive and Office for Nuclear
       Regulation consultation zones) should proceed only if it can be demonstrated that the
       development would not increase the risk or the adverse consequences of a major
       accident; and

    d. Consultation zones around major accident hazard sites, major accident hazard
       pipelines and Health and Safety Executive licensed explosives sites, safeguarded
       areas around civilian aerodromes or technical sites53 and Outline Planning Zones or
       Detailed Emergency Planning Zones around nuclear sites. Development proposals
       within these areas should only be supported where, having consulted the relevant
       consultation bodies54, it is clear that the development will be safe for occupiers and


53 In consultation with the operator of the site and where appropriate the Civil Aviation Authority.
54 The Control of Major Accident Hazards (COMAH) competent authority for zones around hazardous

installations, the operator of the site and where appropriate the Civil Aviation Authority or Secretary of State for
Defence for safeguarding areas around aerodromes, technical sites or military explosive storage areas, and the
Office for Nuclear Regulation or Secretary of State for Defence for zones around nuclear sites.
                                                                                                                  81
      users and will not impose constraints on the operation of the facility or facilities to
      which the safeguarded area or consultation zone relates.

P6: Land and operations for defence and public safety

1. Substantial weight should be attached to the importance of sites, activities, facilities and
   infrastructure required to maintain and enhance defence capability, or whose primary
   purpose is public safety (including uses such as coastal protection works, coastguard and
   lifeboat facilities and emergency services telecommunications infrastructure), when
   considering:

   a. Proposals for such development (whether through modernisation, intensification,
      redevelopment or expansion for operational and related purposes); and

   b. Proposals which could affect their operational activity and capability, including
      situations where other development should only proceed where it can make
      alternative or replacement provision for defence or public safety operations which
      would otherwise be affected, or where noise from operational activities could affect the
      proposed development (in which case policy P4 should also be applied).




                                                                                                82
18. Managing flood risk and coastal change
 The objective of the policies in this chapter is to minimise risks to development arising from
 all sources of flooding and coastal change, taking into account the impacts of climate
 change, by steering development away from areas of risk, ensuring that development will
 be safe for its lifetime without increasing flood risk elsewhere, and incorporating
 sustainable drainage systems where appropriate.

Plan-making policies
F1: Assessing flood risk for plan-making

1. In order to manage development in ways which minimise the risk of flooding to people
   and property, development plans should:

   a. Be informed by an up-to-date strategic flood risk assessment which considers current
      and future flood risk from all sources, including cumulative impacts in, or affecting,
      areas susceptible to flooding; and

   b. Take account of advice from the Environment Agency and other relevant flood risk
      management authorities, such as Lead Local Flood Authorities and internal drainage
      boards, about levels of risk, options for mitigation, and the implications for
      development in the plan area.

F2: Planning for effective flood risk management

1. Development plans should take a risk-based approach when identifying suitable locations
   for development, taking into account all sources of flood risk and the current and future
   impacts of climate change. They should do this, and manage any residual risk, by:

   a. Applying the sequential test in policy F5 and, where relevant, policy F6;

   b. Safeguarding land that is, or is likely to be, required for current or future flood
      management;

   c. Using opportunities provided by new development and improvements in green and
      other infrastructure to reduce the causes and impacts of flooding (making as much
      use as possible of natural flood management techniques as part of an integrated
      approach to flood risk management); and

   d. Where climate change is expected to increase flood risk so that some existing
      development may not be sustainable in the long-term, seeking opportunities to
      relocate development, including housing, to more sustainable locations.

F3: Managing coastal change

1. Development plans should take into account relevant Shoreline Management Plans, the
   National Coastal Erosion Risk Map, the UK Marine Policy Statement and relevant marine
   plans in assessing the risks arising from coastal change and appropriate approaches to
   coastal management. Integrated Coastal Zone Management should be pursued across

                                                                                              83
    local authority and land/sea boundaries, to ensure effective alignment of the terrestrial
    and marine planning regimes.

2. Inappropriate development in vulnerable coastal areas should be avoided when
   identifying suitable locations for development, so that risks arising from coastal change
   are not exacerbated. In order to do this development plans should:

    a. Identify as a Coastal Change Management Area any area likely to be affected by
       physical changes to the coast, estuaries or tidal rivers, over the next century;

    b. Set out what types of development will be appropriate in the Coastal Change
       Management Area, and in what circumstances, taking into account the safeguards in
       policy F9 and local conditions;

    c. Safeguard land that is, or is likely to be, required for current or future coastal change
       risk management, including managed realignment; and

    d. Reduce risks by making provision for development and infrastructure which needs to
       be relocated away from Coastal Change Management Areas.

National decision-making policies
F4: Assessing flood risk for decision-making

1. To inform the assessment of flood risk and, where relevant, appropriate mitigation, a site-
   specific flood risk assessment should accompany all development proposals in Flood
   Zones 2, 3a, and 3b as defined in Annex F, table 1.

2. In Flood Zone 1, a site-specific flood risk assessment should inform and accompany all
   development proposals involving:

    a. Sites of one hectare or more;

    b. Land which has been identified by the Environment Agency as having critical drainage
       problems; and

    c. Land identified in a strategic flood risk assessment or the Flood Map for Planning55 as
       being at risk of flooding from any source, whether now or in the future.

3. Site-specific flood risk assessments should be appropriate to the scale, nature, and
   location of development and should, where relevant, support an assessment of whether a
   development proposal satisfies the sequential and exception tests set out in policies F5
   and F6.

F5: The sequential test

1. The aim of the sequential test is to steer new development to areas with the lowest risk of
   flooding from any source. Where the test applies, development proposals should not be
   located in areas at risk of flooding where alternative sites, appropriate for the
   development, are reasonably available in areas with a lower risk of flooding. The area to

55 Flood Map for Planning published in: https://flood-map-for-planning.service.gov.uk/.

                                                                                                   84
   which the test is applied should not be greater than the anticipated catchment of the
   development in terms of its likely occupiers or users.

2. The sequential test should be used in areas known to be at risk now or in the future from
   any form of flooding, other than for:

   a. Sites allocated in the development plan which were subject to the sequential test
      during plan preparation;

   b. Sites where a site-specific flood risk assessment demonstrates clearly that:

       i. No built development within the site boundary, including access or escape routes,
          land raising or other potentially vulnerable elements, would be located on an area
          that would be at risk of flooding from any source, now and in the future (having
          regard to potential changes in flood risk); or

       ii. Where the site would be at risk of surface water flooding only, the proposed layout,
           design, and mitigation measures would ensure that occupiers and users would
           remain safe from current and future surface water flood risk for the lifetime of the
           development without increasing flood risk elsewhere in accordance with policy F7.

   c. For the following types of development:

       i. Householder development;

       ii. Small non-residential extensions (with a footprint of less than 250m2); and

       iii. Changes of use, other than changes of use to a caravan, camping or chalet site, or
            to a mobile home or park home site.

3. The strategic flood risk assessment covering the area of the proposed development and
   the Flood Map for Planning should provide the evidential basis for applying the sequential
   test.

F6: Development in areas at risk of flooding from rivers or the sea

1. In areas falling within flood zones 2, 3a, or 3b (as defined in Annex F, table 1):

   a. Development proposals should be refused if the use is incompatible with the risk from
      river or sea flooding, as set out in Annex F, table 3; and

   b. In certain other circumstances set out in Annex F, table 3, in addition to satisfying the
      sequential test in policy F5 where applicable, development will only be appropriate
      where an ‘exception test’ is satisfied. The exception test involves demonstrating that
      the development would meet all the following criteria:

       i. Provide wider sustainability benefits to the community that outweigh the flood risk;

       ii. Be safe for its anticipated lifetime in accordance with policy F7; and

       iii. Not increase flood risk elsewhere and, where possible, reduce flood risk overall.
                                                                                                85
2. The application of the exception test should be informed by a site-specific flood risk
   assessment56. The exception test does not need to be applied:

    a. To those forms of development, or in those circumstances, where the sequential test
       is not required, as set out in policy F5; or

    b. Where development is proposed on a site allocated in the development plan to which
       the exception test was applied at the plan-making stage, unless there has been a
       significant increase in the risk of flooding to the site subsequently, or the nature of the
       development itself has changed significantly from that which was allocated so as to
       introduce a more vulnerable use (having regard to Annex F, table 2).

F7: Ensuring development is safe from flooding

1. Development proposals should not present a risk from flooding to potential occupiers,
   users, or visitors, and should not increase flood risk elsewhere.

2. Where development is proposed in a location known to be at risk from any form of
   flooding, now or in the future, it should be refused unless:

    a. Within the site, the most vulnerable development is located in areas of lowest flood
       risk, unless there are overriding reasons which justify a different arrangement;

    b. The development will be safe throughout its lifetime taking account of the vulnerability
       of its users;

    c. Any residual risk can be safely managed, and safe access and escape routes are
       included where appropriate, as part of an agreed emergency plan;

    d. The development is appropriately flood resistant and resilient such that, in the event of
       a flood, it could be quickly brought back into use without significant refurbishment; and

    e. It can be demonstrated that flood risk will not be increased elsewhere.

F8: Sustainable drainage systems and watercourses

1. Development proposals which could affect drainage on or around the development site
   should incorporate sustainable drainage systems to control flow rates and reduce
   volumes of runoff, in ways which are proportionate to the nature and scale of the
   proposal. The systems employed should provide multifunctional benefits where possible,
   facilitating improvements in water quality, biodiversity and amenity.

2. Sustainable Drainage Systems should:

    a. Be designed in accordance with the National Standards for Sustainable Drainage
       Systems57;


56 For the purpose of policy F2, when the exception test is being applied at the plan-making stage, it should be

informed instead by an up-to-date strategic flood risk assessment.
57 National Standards for Sustainable Drainage Systems published in: National standards for sustainable

drainage systems (SuDS) - GOV.UK.
                                                                                                               86
   b. Have maintenance arrangements in place to ensure an acceptable standard of
      operation for the anticipated lifetime of the development; and

   c. In the case of proposals for major development, take account of advice from the Lead
      Local Flood Authority.

3. Development proposals should not enclose existing watercourses where this is not
   already the case, unless there are compelling reasons to do so; and should where
   possible remove existing culverts and renaturalise existing river channels, unless to do so
   would increase flood risk, result in other environmental harm or cause harm to heritage
   assets.

F9: Development in Coastal Change Management Areas

1. Development should not take place within a Coastal Change Management Area (or within
   other areas likely to be subject to coastal erosion or tidal inundation over the next century,
   accounting for the National Coastal Erosion Risk Map and other up-to-date evidence on
   coastal change and its management) unless it can be demonstrated that it would:

   a. Be safe over its planned lifetime;

   b. Reflect the provisions of the relevant Shoreline Management Plan and not have an
      unacceptable impact on coastal change processes; and

   c. Provide wider sustainability benefits which justify the development.

2. Where development proposals meet these requirements, time-limited permissions and
   site-restoration conditions should be used where appropriate.

3. New residential development (including through changes of use) is inappropriate within
   an area to which this policy applies, unless it satisfies the tests set out at paragraph 1(a)
   to 1(c) in this policy.




                                                                                               87
19. Conserving and enhancing the natural
    environment
 The objective of the policies in this chapter is to influence the design and location of new
 development to help drive nature’s recovery and contribute to wider environmental
 outcomes, safeguarding our most important habitats, species and landscapes and
 recognising the centrality of natural capital to delivering sustainable growth.

Plan-making policies
N1: Identifying environmental opportunities and safeguards

1. Development plans should safeguard and enhance the natural environment, and reflect
   the wider benefits from natural capital and ecosystem services, by using Local Nature
   Recovery Strategies, Protected Landscape Management Plans, River Basin Management
   Plans, National Forest Strategies, Community Forest Plans and other relevant evidence
   at the most appropriate level to:

    a. Set out the hierarchy of international, national and locally designated sites and areas
       of importance for their landscape, geodiversity or biodiversity value in the plan area,
       and identify other features which require particular consideration in managing
       development due to their environmental value such as chalk streams;

    b. Identify opportunities for the conservation, enhancement and recovery of landscapes,
       sensitive waterbodies, habitats and priority or threatened species, including through
       habitat restoration, the use of nature-based solutions, and the creation and
       strengthening of ecological networks that are more resilient to current and future
       pressures (including opportunities which exist at a catchment or landscape scale
       across plan boundaries);

    c. Steer the location of development, including through site allocations, in ways which
       utilise land of least environmental value where that would be consistent with other
       policies in this Framework. This should include limiting the scale and extent of
       development within Protected Landscapes, avoiding the use of higher quality
       agricultural land where land of poorer quality is available and avoiding and minimising
       harm to designated sites of importance for nature. Areas which could become of
       particular importance for nature identified in Local Nature Recovery Strategies should
       be taken into account as opportunities to integrate development with environmental
       restoration, but should not necessarily preclude the allocation of land for development;
       and

    d. Set out standards for green infrastructure provision, in a way which complements
       and/or incorporates those for recreational land (as set out in policy HC1). These
       should draw upon Natural England’s Green Infrastructure Standards for England58,
       tailored as necessary to local circumstances.



58 Natural England’s Green Infrastructure Standards for England published in:

https://designatedsites.naturalengland.org.uk/GreenInfrastructure/GIStandards.aspx
                                                                                                88
2. Development plans should only set local standards for biodiversity net gain which are in
   excess of the statutory net gain requirement where this is for specific site allocations, and
   is fully justified and deliverable. Local standards should not extend to categories of
   development which are exempt from statutory biodiversity net gain.

National decision-making policies
N2: Improving the natural environment

1. To contribute positively to the natural environment, and support nature’s recovery,
   development proposals should:

   a. Consider the environmental qualities of land proposed for development, including
      habitats, landscape character and the natural beauty of the countryside, and identify
      opportunities for those qualities to be conserved or enhanced (including through
      requirements for biodiversity net gain where these apply);

   b. Take into account the quality of agricultural land (including that classified as best and
      most versatile agricultural land, and its grade), and if significant development of
      agricultural land is necessary, use areas of poorer quality land where possible;

   c. Take suitable opportunities to connect to and strengthen ecological networks that
      extend beyond the site, drawing on the measures proposed by Local Nature Recovery
      Strategies, National Forest Strategies and Community Forest Plans, where present,
      and other relevant assessments;

   d. Conserve and enhance existing natural features of visual, historic or nature
      conservation value (such as established trees and hedgerows) where possible; and
      use appropriate landscaping to help create a well-designed place and integrate the
      development into its surroundings;

   e. Use green infrastructure provided as part of the scheme and nature-based solutions to
      secure multiple benefits: such as for biodiversity; surface water and pollution
      management (including maintaining flow rates and water quality); climate change
      mitigation and adaptation, and recreation;

   f. Minimise any adverse impacts on biodiversity and include features which support
      priority or threatened species such as swifts, bats and hedgehogs. Development
      proposals should incorporate integrated nest boxes (commonly known as swift bricks)
      into their construction unless there are compelling technical reasons which prevent
      their use, or would make them ineffective; and

   g. Ensure that green infrastructure and other features to support nature are located and
      designed to minimise risk of future failure, and that appropriate measures are in place
      for any necessary long-term management.

2. If significant harm to biodiversity resulting from a development cannot be avoided
   (through locating on an alternative site with less harmful impacts), adequately mitigated
   or, as a last resort, compensated for, then the development should be refused.

3. Development proposals may incorporate biodiversity enhancements which exceed the
   statutory objective for biodiversity net gain, but this should only be a requirement where it
                                                                                               89
    is set out in up-to-date development plan policies for specific site allocations. Decision-
    makers should not give weight to other development plan policies which require
    biodiversity gains which go beyond the statutory framework, including where a policy
    requires gains for development proposals which are exempt.

N3: Trees in new development

1. In recognition of the benefits which trees can provide for biodiversity, climate change
   mitigation and adaptation, and the character and quality of the built environment,
   development proposals should:

    a. Make new streets tree-lined (unless there are strong reasons why this would be
       inappropriate in specific streets), and incorporate trees in other suitable locations,
       such as in parks and through the provision of community orchards;

    b. Ensure that the selection of species and their placement is compatible with highways
       and other infrastructure requirements and the needs of different users of public
       spaces; and will be effective in helping to adapt to the effects of climate change and
       delivering other environmental benefits. Suitable arboricultural advice should be
       sought, and proposals discussed with highways and trees officers where necessary,
       so that the right trees are planted in the right places; and

    c. Make provision for the long-term maintenance of both existing and newly-planted trees
       which form part of the development.

N4: Protected Landscapes

1. Development proposals within Protected Landscapes should be limited in scale and
   extent and sensitively located and designed to avoid harm to the statutory purposes and
   special qualities of the Protected Landscape. Substantial weight should be placed on the
   importance of conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of these areas, and to
   conserving and enhancing wildlife and cultural heritage in National Parks and the Broads.

2. Proposals for major development59 within Protected Landscapes should be refused other
   than in exceptional circumstances, and where it can be demonstrated that the
   development is in the public interest. To inform a decision about whether exceptional
   circumstances exist, consideration of such proposals should include an assessment of:

    a. The need for the development, including in terms of any national considerations such
       as maintaining a sufficient supply of minerals, and the impact of permitting it, or
       refusing it, upon the local economy;

    b. The cost of, and scope for, developing outside the Protected Landscape, or meeting
       the need for the development in some other way; and

    c. Any detrimental effect on the environment, the landscape and recreational
       opportunities, and the extent to which it could be moderated.



59 For the purpose of this policy and policy N5 only, whether a proposal is ‘major development’ is a matter for

the decision-maker, taking into account its nature, scale and setting, and whether it could have a significant
adverse impact on the statutory purposes for which the area has been designated or defined.
                                                                                                                  90
3. Where, exceptionally, proposals for major development are approved within Protected
   Landscapes, steps should be taken to mitigate potential adverse impacts on their special
   qualities and statutory purposes60, including on features such as tranquillity and dark
   skies.

4. Development proposals within the setting of Protected Landscapes should be sensitively
   located and designed to avoid or minimise adverse impacts on the Protected Landscape.

N5: Maintaining the character of the coast

1. Development proposals should maintain the character of undeveloped areas of coast,
   including land designated for its landscape, habitat or heritage value, while improving
   public access to it where appropriate. They should not hinder the completion and
   maintenance of a continuous signed and managed route around the coast (the King
   Charles III England Coast Path National Trail).

2. Development proposals in areas defined as Heritage Coast (and which do not already fall
   within a Protected Landscape) should be consistent with the special character of the area
   and the importance of its conservation. Major development within areas defined as
   Heritage Coast should not be supported, unless the development is compatible with the
   special character of the area.

3. If located within a Coastal Change Management Area, development proposals should
   also be considered against policy F9.

N6: Areas of particular importance for biodiversity and geodiversity

1. To support the conservation of important habitats, species and sites of geodiversity value,
   development proposals affecting:

    a. A site of international importance, which for the purpose of this policy is a habitats site,
       should be refused unless:

        i. An appropriate assessment has concluded that the proposal will not adversely
           affect the integrity of the site (either individually or in combination with other
           developments), or the proposal can satisfy the derogation tests61; and/or

        ii. The impact of development on the relevant protected features of the protected site
            is being addressed through an Environmental Delivery Plan which has been made
            and the developer has committed to paying the nature restoration levy.

    b. A site of national importance, which for the purpose of this policy is one designated as
       a Site of Special Scientific Interest, should only be supported if:

        i. There would be no adverse effect (either individually or in combination with other
           developments) on the site’s features of special scientific interest; or

60 Where significant harm cannot be mitigated, it may be appropriate to consider whether suitable compensation

would be acceptable.
61 These being that there are no feasible alternative solutions to the proposal which are less damaging, there

are imperative reasons of overriding public interest for it to proceed, and compensatory measures are secured
to ensure that the overall coherence of the network of habitats sites is maintained.
                                                                                                             91
        ii. The benefits of the development in the location proposed clearly outweigh both the
            likely impact on the features of special scientific interest, and any broader impact
            on the national network of Sites of Special Scientific Interest; or

        iii. The impact of development on the relevant protected feature of the protected site
             is being addressed through an Environmental Delivery Plan which has been made
             and the developer has committed to paying the nature restoration levy.

    c. A site of local importance, which for the purpose of this policy is one designated as a
       Local Nature Reserve or identified as a local wildlife site, local geological site or
       equivalent in the development plan, should only be supported if:

        i. There would not be a significant adverse effect on the integrity of the site; or

        ii. The benefits of development in the location proposed clearly outweigh the likely
            impact on the features which make the site valuable for nature conservation.

2. Irrespective of a site’s status in nature conservation terms, development proposals which
   would entail the loss or deterioration of irreplaceable habitats (such as ancient woodland
   and ancient or veteran trees) should be refused, unless there are wholly exceptional
   reasons62 and a suitable compensation strategy exists.

3. This policy applies to development on land inside or outside a designated area, if it would
   have an impact on the identified biodiversity or geodiversity value of the area concerned.




62 For example, infrastructure projects (including nationally significant infrastructure projects, orders under the

Transport and Works Act and hybrid bills), where the public benefit would clearly outweigh the loss or
deterioration of the relevant habitats.
                                                                                                                      92
20. Conserving and enhancing the historic
    environment
 The objective of the policies in this chapter is to conserve and enhance the historic
 environment. Heritage assets are an irreplaceable resource, and range from sites and
 buildings of local historic value to those of the highest significance, such as World Heritage
 Sites which are internationally recognised to be of Outstanding Universal Value. These
 assets should be conserved in a manner appropriate to their significance, so that they can
 be enjoyed for their contribution to the quality of life of existing and future generations63.

Plan-making policies
HE1: Planning for the historic environment

1. To deliver a positive strategy for the conservation, enhancement and enjoyment of the
   historic environment, development plans should, at the most appropriate level:

    a. Identify the heritage assets within the plan area, including those heritage assets at
       most risk through neglect, decay or other threats, set out the key issues facing them
       and identify where these assets can be used to support sustainable development;

    b. Be informed by a proportionate heritage assessment;

    c. Consider the wider social, cultural, economic and environmental benefits that
       conservation of the historic environment can bring;

    d. Take opportunities, for example through site allocations, design guides, design codes
       and masterplans, to draw on the contribution which the historic environment can make
       to the character and quality of development, and its context; and

    e. Be supported by a local heritage list to identify non-designated heritage assets that
       are important to the local community.

HE2: Conservation Areas and World Heritage Sites

1. To conserve the significance of conservation areas and World Heritage Sites,
   development plans should:

    a. Identify opportunities for new development affecting these assets to enhance or better
       reveal their significance, alongside any measures needed to safeguard their
       importance and long-term future; and reflect these in policies for site allocations and/or
       accompanying design guides, design codes or masterplans; and

    b. Include any locally-specific policies needed to conserve the significance and
       Outstanding Universal Value of World Heritage Sites (including any contribution made
       by their setting including any buffer zone). Those policies should encourage

63 The policies set out in this chapter also relate, as applicable, to the heritage-related consent regimes for

which local planning authorities are responsible under the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas)
Act 1990.
                                                                                                                  93
      sustainable use and take into account relevant policies and objectives in World
      Heritage Site management plans.

2. Conservation areas should be reviewed periodically, and new or amended designations
   should be accompanied by an adopted appraisal and management plan. These
   documents should be aligned with the policies in the development plan. When
   considering a new or amended conservation area designation, local planning authorities
   should ensure that an area justifies such status because of its special architectural or
   historic interest, and that the concept of conservation is not devalued through the
   designation of areas that lack special interest.

HE3: Historic Environment Records

1. To support effective plan-making and decision-making, local planning authorities should
   maintain or have access to a Historic Environment Record. This should contain up-to-date
   evidence about the historic environment in their area and be used to:

   a. Assess the significance of heritage assets and the contribution they make to their
      environment and inform the preparation of local lists;

   b. Help identify where currently unidentified heritage assets, particularly sites of historic
      and archaeological interest, will be discovered in the future; and

   c. Inform development plans, including scoping opportunities and constraints on land
      allocated for development, inform the preparation of local heritage lists and provide
      applicants and decision-makers with information to help assess the potential effects of
      proposed development on heritage assets.

2. Local planning authorities should make information about the historic environment,
   gathered as part of plan-making or development management activities, publicly
   accessible.

National decision-making policies
HE4: Securing the conservation of heritage assets

1. Heritage assets, as an irreplaceable resource, should be conserved in a manner
   appropriate to their significance. To achieve this, development proposals which would
   affect the significance of heritage assets, including any contribution made by their setting
   should:

   a. Maintain or secure a use consistent with their conservation, taking into account the
      importance of maintaining the assets, the positive contribution they can make to
      sustainable communities including local economies, and the positive contribution they
      can make to local character and distinctiveness; and

   b. Avoid (or if that is not possible, minimise) harm to the significance of heritage assets,
      and instead conserve this significance.

2. Any harm to, or loss of, the significance of a designated heritage asset (including from
   development within its setting) should have a clear and convincing justification in
   accordance with the policies in this chapter.
                                                                                               94
3. Where there is evidence of deliberate neglect of, or damage to, a heritage asset, the
   deteriorated state of the asset should not be taken into account in any decision relating to
   the asset.

4. Proposals for enabling development, which would otherwise conflict with other policies in
   this Framework and/or those in the development plan, but which would secure the future
   conservation of a heritage asset, should be considered on the basis of whether the
   conservation benefits outweigh the disbenefits of departing from the policies concerned.

HE5: Assessing effects on heritage assets

1. Development proposals affecting heritage assets should be accompanied by an
   assessment of the significance of the assets affected (including any contribution made by
   their setting) and of the potential effect of the proposal on their significance. The level of
   detail should be proportionate to the assets’ importance and no more than is necessary to
   understand the potential effect of the proposal on their significance. The relevant historic
   environment record should be referred to in making this assessment, and appropriate
   expertise employed where necessary.

2. Assessments of the potential effects of development proposals on the significance of
   heritage assets (including through effects on their setting) should identify whether
   proposals would be likely to:

   a. Have a positive effect, which is where the significance of a heritage asset would be
      enhanced, or better revealed; or

   b. Have no effect on the significance of a heritage asset; or

   c. Result in harm to the significance of a heritage asset, either from work affecting the
      asset itself or from development within its setting. The degree of harm should be
      identified: substantial harm would occur where the development proposal would
      seriously affect a key element of the asset’s significance; or

   d. Cause the total loss of the significance of a heritage asset.

3. In making this assessment it is the effect on a heritage asset’s significance rather than the
   scale of the development which should be considered.

4. Decision-makers should be satisfied that assessments accurately reflect the effects on
   heritage assets caused by development proposals.

5. Where a development proposal involves, or has the potential to involve, a heritage asset
   with archaeological interest, an appropriate desk-based assessment should be
   undertaken and, where necessary, a field evaluation. These should be used to help
   understand the asset’s significance and the potential effect of the proposal on this, which
   should inform the design, mitigation and implementation of the development.

HE6: Proposals affecting designated heritage assets

1. When considering the potential effect of a development proposal on the significance of a
   designated heritage asset, substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation
                                                                                               95
    (and the more important the asset, the greater the weight should be). This is irrespective
    of whether any potential effect amounts to a positive effect, harm, substantial harm, or
    total loss of its significance.

2. Development proposals which would have a positive effect on a designated heritage
   asset should be supported.

3. Any harm to a designated heritage asset will be a matter of considerable importance and
   weight, which should be dealt with in accordance with paragraphs 4 to 6 of this policy.

4. Where a development proposal would harm the significance of a designated heritage
   asset the effect on the asset and its significance should be weighed against any public
   benefits resulting from the proposal. Important public benefits can include securing the
   long-term reuse of a vacant or underused listed building, and enabling energy efficiency
   and low carbon heating measures to be employed.

5. Where a development proposal would cause substantial harm to, or the total loss of, the
   significance of a designated heritage asset, consent should be refused unless it can be
   demonstrated that the harm is necessary to achieve substantial public benefits that
   outweigh the harm or loss, or if all of the following apply:

    a. The nature of the heritage asset would otherwise prevent all reasonable uses of the
       site;

    b. No suitable use for the heritage asset itself can be found in the medium term through
       appropriate marketing that will enable its conservation;

    c. Conservation by grant-funding or some form of not for profit, charitable or public
       ownership is not possible; and

    d. The harm or loss is outweighed by the benefit of bringing the asset back into use.

6. Within this context, development which would cause substantial harm to, or the total loss
   of, the significance of grade II listed buildings, or grade II registered parks or gardens,
   should be exceptional; while development which would cause substantial harm to, or the
   total loss of, assets of the highest significance, notably scheduled monuments, protected
   wreck sites, registered battlefields, grade I and II* listed buildings, grade I and II*
   registered parks and gardens, and World Heritage Sites, should be wholly exceptional64.

HE7: Decisions on non-designated heritage assets

1. Development proposals which would have a positive effect on a non-designated heritage
   asset should be supported.

2. Where a development proposal would harm the significance of a non-designated heritage
   asset, this should be weighed against the benefits of the proposal and a balanced
   judgement made, having regard to the scale of any harm or loss and the significance of
   the non-designated heritage asset.


64 Non-designated heritage assets of archaeological interest that a decision-maker considers to be equivalent

significance to scheduled monuments should be considered subject to the policies for designated heritage
assets.
                                                                                                                96
3. Where a development proposal would cause substantial harm to, or the total loss of, the
   significance of a non-designated heritage asset, it should only be supported where the
   harm or loss is outweighed by the benefits of the proposal, having regard to the scale of
   the harm or loss and the significance of the non-designated heritage asset.

HE8: World Heritage Sites

1. To secure the long-term future of World Heritage Sites65 and support the conservation of
   their significance and Outstanding Universal Value, development proposals that affect a
   World Heritage Site should:

    a. Be designed in a way which pays particular regard to the significance and Outstanding
       Universal Value of the World Heritage Site (including any contribution made by its
       setting including any buffer zone);

    b. Retain and conserve buildings and other features which make a positive contribution
       to the significance and Outstanding Universal Value of the World Heritage Site where
       possible;

    c. Have regard to the World Heritage Site management plan; and

    d. Be supported by an assessment of the impact, including any potential cumulative
       impact, on the significance and attributes of Outstanding Universal Value of the World
       Heritage Site. This should be informed by appropriate information such as visual
       impact assessments and natural environment, archaeological or historical data.

2. Not all elements of a World Heritage Site will necessarily contribute to its significance or
   Outstanding Universal Value. Where a development proposal would result in the loss of a
   building or other element which contributes to the significance or Outstanding Universal
   Value of a World Heritage Site, the assessment of impact should take into account the
   significance and the contribution made to Outstanding Universal Value by the element
   affected and its contribution to the significance of the World Heritage Site as a whole, and
   the effects of this considered in accordance with policies HE5 and HE6.

3. Proposals that conserve those elements of a World Heritage Site or its setting, including
   any buffer zone, that make a positive contribution to it or which better reveal its
   significance, should be supported.

HE9: Conservation areas

1. Development proposals within or affecting the significance of conservation areas should:

    a. Retain and conserve buildings and other features which make a positive contribution
       to the character or appearance of the conservation area where possible; and

    b. Consider the area’s special architectural or historic interest (as identified as part of the
       designation of the conservation area) in the design of development.



65 Any development affecting World Heritage Sites should be assessed against this policy. It should be noted

that some World Heritage Sites are inscribed by UNESCO to be of natural significance rather than cultural
significance; and in some cases they are inscribed for both their natural and cultural significance.
                                                                                                               97
2. Not all elements of a conservation area will necessarily contribute to its significance.
   Where a development proposal would result in the loss of a building or other element
   which contributes to the character or appearance of a conservation area that is desirable
   to conserve, the assessment of impact should take into account the relative significance
   of the element affected and its contribution to the significance of the conservation area as
   a whole, and the effects of this considered in accordance with policies HE5 and HE6.

3. Proposals which conserve those elements of a conservation area that make a positive
   contribution to the area (or which better reveal its significance) should be supported.

HE10: Loss or removal of heritage assets

1. Where a development proposal would result in the loss of the whole or part of a heritage
   asset (whether designated or not):

   a. The development should not be approved without all reasonable steps being taken to
      ensure that the new development will proceed after the loss has occurred, including
      through the use of planning conditions and planning obligations to secure the
      development against the loss of the asset; and

   b. The applicant should record and advance understanding of the significance of the
      asset to be lost in a manner proportionate to its importance and the potential impact
      upon it; and should make this evidence (and any archive generated) publicly
      accessible by depositing it in the relevant Historic Environment Record, and any
      archives with a local museum or other public depository. The ability to record evidence
      of our past should not be a decisive factor in deciding whether such loss should be
      approved.

2. Heritage assets with archaeological interest should be preserved in situ where feasible.
   Where an asset cannot be preserved or managed on-site, appropriate provision should
   be made for the investigation, understanding, recording, dissemination and archiving of
   that asset, which should be undertaken by suitably-qualified individuals or organisations.

3. Development proposals to remove or alter a historic statue, plaque, memorial or
   monument (whether listed or not), should retain the feature in situ where possible (and,
   where appropriate, be supported by an explanation of their historic and social context).




                                                                                              98
Annex A: Implementation
For the purposes of decision-making
1. The policies in this Framework are material considerations which must be taken into
   account in decision-making from the day of its publication.

2. Development plan policies (or parts of those policies) which are materially inconsistent
   with national decision-making policies in this Framework should be given very limited
   weight. The only exception to this is where they have been examined and adopted66 or
   made against this Framework. Other development plan policies67 should not be given
   reduced weight simply because they were adopted prior to the publication of this
   Framework.

3. Where a local planning authority can demonstrate a five year supply of deliverable
   housing sites (with the appropriate buffer) and where the Housing Delivery Test indicates
   that the delivery of housing is more than 75% of the housing requirement over the
   previous three years, for the purposes of policy S5(1)(j), if the most up-to-date local
   housing need figure (calculated using the standard method set out in Annex D) is greater
   than the housing requirement set out in adopted development plan policies, this should
   not be considered as evidence of unmet need, for a period of five years from the date of
   the plan’s adoption.

For the purposes of plan-making
4. Any local plans minerals and waste plans and supplementary plans being prepared under
   Part 2 of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 (as amended by the Levelling-
   up and Regeneration Act 2023) and the Town and Country Planning (Local Planning)
   (England) Regulations 2026 should be produced in accordance with this Framework.

5. Spatial development strategies should be produced in accordance with this Framework.

6. Neighbourhood plans that have been submitted to the local planning authority under
   Regulation 1568, on or before, the date of publication of this Framework should be
   prepared in accordance with the Framework published in December 2024. Any
   neighbourhood plans that have not been submitted must comply with this Framework. For
   neighbourhood plans that have already been submitted, the qualifying body may choose
   to withdraw the plan and update it to take account of this Framework.

7. For all plans that should be produced in accordance with this Framework this means the
   policies in this version of the Framework will apply from 17 August 2026.

8. Any other plans should be produced in accordance with the version of this Framework
   published in December 2024, unless any of the transitional arrangements in Annex 1 to
   that Framework apply (in which case those transitional arrangements continue to apply).


66 Reference to the ‘adoption’ of a plan in annex A also applies to where a plan has been ‘approved’ by the

Secretary of State.
67 Including policies in made neighbourhood plans.
68 Neighbourhood Planning (General) Regulations 2012.

                                                                                                              99
Planning freedoms
9. The government will continue to explore with individual areas the potential for planning
   freedoms and flexibilities, for instance where this would facilitate an increase in the
   amount of housing that can be delivered.

Written Ministerial Statements and other planning policy
documents which have been incorporated or superseded
10. The content of the following Written Ministerial Statements and other documents, where
    they relate to planning policies or decisions, has either been fully or partially incorporated
    within the National Planning Policy Framework or no longer represents up-to-date
    government policy:

   •   Large-scale housing site delivery (13 February 2025)

   •   Planning policy for traveller sites (12 December 2024)

   •   Solar and protecting our Food Security and Best and Most Versatile (BMV) Land (15
       May 2024)

   •   The Next Stage in Our Long-Term Plan for Housing Update (19 December 2023)

   •   Planning - Local Energy Efficiency Standards Update (13 December 2023)

   •   Updated policy on planning for onshore wind development (5 September 2023)

   •   An update on Levelling Up - Onshore Wind Development in England (6 December
       2022)

   •   Housing Update (15 December 2021)

   •   Affordable Homes Update (24 May 2021)

   •   Planning Update - Written Statement (1 October 2019)

   •   Planning Independent Report on Build Out Rates and Permitted Development (13
       March 2019)

   •   Government’s new planning rulebook to deliver more quality, well-designed homes (24
       July 2018)

   •   Extending Buildings Upwards to Create New Homes (5 February 2018)

   •   Neighbourhood Plans - Written Statement (12 December 2016)

   •   Green Belt Protection and Intentional Unauthorised Development (17 December
       2015)

   •   Shale gas and oil policy (16 September 2015)
                                                                                               100
   •   Giving local people the final say over onshore wind farms (18 June 2015)

   •   Planning Update (25 March 2015)

   •   Community Pubs (26 January 2015)

   •   Sustainable Drainage Systems (18 December 2014)

   •   Small-Scale Developers (1 December 2014)

   •   Business, Innovation and Skills (10 October 2013)

   •   Improving planning (3 September 2013)

   •   Local Planning and Onshore Wind (1 June 2013)

   •   Garden Development (9 June 2010)

   •   Planning - Development on Garden Land (19 January 2010)

   •   Draft National Policy Statements (9 November 2009)

   •   Eco-towns and zero-carbon homes (16 July 2009)

11. The transitional arrangements set out in this Annex apply to the use of policy within these
    statements, for both decision-making and plan-making.




                                                                                            101
Annex B: Glossary
Affordable housing: Housing for sale or rent, for those whose needs are not met by the
market (including housing that provides a subsidised route to home ownership and/or is for
essential local workers or national military housing needs); and which complies with one or
more of the following definitions:

a. Social Rent: meets all of the following conditions: (a) the rent is set in accordance with
   the government’s rent policy for Social Rent; (b) the landlord is a registered provider; and
   (c) it includes provisions to remain at an affordable price for future eligible households, or
   for the subsidy to be recycled for alternative affordable housing provision.

b. Other affordable housing for rent: meets all of the following conditions: (a) the rent is
   set in accordance with the government’s rent policy for Affordable Rent, or is at least 20%
   below local market rents (including service charges where applicable); (b) the landlord is
   a registered provider, except where it is included as part of a Build to Rent scheme (in
   which case the landlord need not be a registered provider); and (c) it includes provisions
   to remain at an affordable price for future eligible households, or for the subsidy to be
   recycled for alternative affordable housing provision. For Build to Rent schemes
   affordable housing for rent is expected to be the normal form of affordable housing
   provision (and, in this context, is known as Affordable Private Rent).

c. Discounted market sales housing: is that sold at a discount of at least 20% below local
   market value. Eligibility is determined with regard to local incomes and local house prices.
   Provisions should be in place to ensure housing remains at a discount for future eligible
   households.

d. Other affordable routes to home ownership: is housing provided for sale that provides
   a route to ownership for those who could not achieve home ownership through the
   market. It includes shared ownership, relevant equity loans, other low cost homes for sale
   (at a price equivalent to at least 20% below local market value) and rent to buy (which
   includes a period of intermediate rent). Where public grant funding is provided, there
   should be provisions for the homes to remain at an affordable price for future eligible
   households, or for any receipts to be recycled for alternative affordable housing provision,
   or refunded to government or the relevant authority specified in the funding agreement.

e. Military affordable housing: meets all of the following conditions: (a) the rent is sub-
   market military rent as determined by the Ministry of Defence; and (b) it includes
   provisions to remain as affordable housing for future eligible households, service
   personnel and veteran households (including widowed partners and spouses of service
   personnel), or for the subsidy to be recycled for alternative affordable housing provision.

Air Quality Management Areas: Areas designated by local authorities because they are not
likely to achieve national air quality objectives by the relevant deadlines.

Ancient or veteran tree: A tree which, because of its age, size and condition, is of
exceptional biodiversity, cultural or heritage value. All ancient trees are veteran trees. Not all
veteran trees are old enough to be ancient, but are old relative to other trees of the same
species. Very few trees of any species reach the ancient life-stage.

Ancient woodland: An area that has been wooded continuously since at least 1600 AD. It
                                                                                               102
includes ancient semi-natural woodland (ASNW), plantations on ancient woodland sites
(PAWS), ancient wood pasture and parkland (AWPP) and infilled ancient wood pasture and
parkland (IAWPP).

Archaeological interest: There will be archaeological interest in a heritage asset if it holds,
or potentially holds, evidence of past human activity worthy of expert investigation at some
point.

Article 4 direction: A direction made under Article 4 of the Town and Country Planning
(General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 which withdraws permitted
development rights granted by that Order.

Aviation airfields: Licensed or unlicensed aerodromes with hard or grass runways, often
with extensive areas of open land related to aviation activity.

Best and most versatile agricultural land: Land in grades 1, 2 and 3a of the Agricultural
Land Classification (ALC). ALC is graded from 1 to 5 and based on yield, range and
versatility of use, and need for input.

Brownfield land: See Previously developed land.

Brownfield land registers: Registers of previously developed land that local planning
authorities consider to be appropriate for residential development, having regard to criteria in
the Town and Country Planning (Brownfield Land Registers) Regulations 2017. Local
planning authorities will be able to trigger a grant of permission in principle for residential
development on suitable sites in their registers where they follow the required procedures.

Build to Rent: Purpose built housing that is typically 100% rented out. It can form part of a
wider multi-tenure development comprising either flats or houses, but should be on the same
site and/or contiguous with the main development. Schemes will typically be professionally
managed stock in single ownership and management control.

Climate change adaptation: Adjustments made to natural or human systems in response to
the actual or anticipated impacts of climate change, to mitigate harm or exploit beneficial
opportunities.

Climate change mitigation: Action to reduce the impact of human activity on the climate
system, primarily through reducing greenhouse gas emissions.

Coastal Change Management Area: An area identified in plans as likely to be affected by
physical changes to the coast, estuaries or tidal rivers, over the next century, through
erosion, coastal landslip, permanent inundation or coastal accretion.

Community facilities: Meeting places, public houses, places of worship, cultural venues,
youth centres, allotments, cemeteries and burial grounds, and facilities for play, sport and
informal recreation.

Community-led development: A development taken forward by, or with, a not-for-profit
organisation, that is primarily for the purpose of meeting the needs of its members or the
wider local community, rather than being a primarily commercial enterprise. The organisation
should be created, managed and democratically controlled by its members, and membership
of the organisation should be open to all beneficiaries and prospective beneficiaries of that
                                                                                               103
organisation. It may take any one of various legal forms including a co-operative society,
community benefit society and company limited by guarantee. The organisation should own,
manage or steward the development in a manner consistent with its purpose, potentially
through a mutually supported arrangement with a registered provider of social housing. The
benefits of the development to the community should be clearly defined and consideration
given to how those benefits can be protected over time, including in the event of the
organisation being wound up.

Community Right to Build Order: An Order made by the local planning authority (under the
Town and Country Planning Act 1990) that grants planning permission for a site-specific
development proposal or classes of development.

Competent person (to prepare site investigation information): A person with a
recognised relevant qualification, sufficient experience in dealing with the type(s) of pollution
or land instability, and membership of a relevant professional organisation.

Connectivity: The degree to which a location provides access to jobs, services, and facilities
by sustainable transport modes. The Connectivity Tool (Connectivity Tool - GOV.UK)
provides a means of assessing this.

Conservation/conserve (for heritage policy): The process of maintaining and managing
change to a heritage asset in a way that sustains, preserves and, where appropriate,
enhances its significance.

Contamination: Where the actual or suspected presence of substances in, on or under the
land may cause risks to people, property, human activities or the environment, regardless of
whether or not the land meets the statutory definition of contaminated land in Part IIA of the
Environmental Protection Act 1990.

Critical and growth minerals: Critical minerals are materials with the greatest economic
importance and highest risk of supply disruption. This includes bismuth, borates, indium, iron,
magnesite, magnesium, niobium, phosphorous, sodium compounds, tellurium, vanadium and
zinc. Growth minerals are those which are of greatest importance to the Industrial Strategy’s
growth sectors. This includes beryllium, chromium, copper, uranium and graphite (natural
and synthetic). The following minerals are identified as both critical and growth minerals in
the Critical Minerals Strategy69: aluminium, antimony, cobalt, gallium, germanium graphite
(natural), hafnium, helium, manganese, nickel, Platinum Group Metals (PGMs) (which
include iridium, platinum, rhodium and ruthenium), Rare Earth Elements (REEs), rhenium,
silicon, tantalum, tin, titanium, tungsten and lithium.

Deliverable: To be considered deliverable, sites for housing or other pitches and plots
should be available now, offer a suitable location for development now, and be achievable
with a realistic prospect that homes will be delivered on the site within five years. In
particular:

a. sites which do not involve major development and have planning permission, and all sites
   with detailed planning permission, should be considered deliverable until permission
   expires, unless there is clear evidence that homes will not be delivered within five years
   (for example because they are no longer viable, there is no longer a demand for the type
   of units or sites have long-term phasing plans).

69 Critical Minerals Strategy published in: Vision 2035: Critical Minerals Strategy - GOV.UK.

                                                                                                104
b. where a site has outline planning permission for major development, has been allocated
   in a development plan, has a grant of permission in principle, or is identified on a
   brownfield land register, it should only be considered deliverable where there is clear
   evidence that homes will be delivered on-site within five years.

Design code: A set of illustrated design requirements that provide specific, detailed
parameters for the physical development of a site, or area. The graphic and written
components of the code should build upon a design vision, such as a masterplan or other
design and development framework for a site or area.

Design guide: A document providing guidance on how development can be carried out in
accordance with good design practice, often produced by a local authority.

Designated heritage asset: A World Heritage Site, Scheduled Monument, Listed Building,
Protected Wreck Site, Registered Park and Garden, Registered Battlefield or Conservation
Area designated under the relevant legislation or the UNESCO World Heritage Convention.

Designated rural areas: National Parks, National Landscapes, areas designated as rural
under Section 157 of the Housing Act 1985, and other parishes or unparished areas with a
population of 3,000 or less and a population density of two persons or less per hectare.

Developable: To be considered developable, sites should be in a suitable location for
housing development (or for traveller sites) with a reasonable prospect that they will be
available and could be viably developed at the point envisaged.

Development plan: Is defined in section 38 of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act
2004, and includes adopted spatial development strategies, adopted local plans, adopted
minerals and waste plans, adopted supplementary plans, neighbourhood plans that have
been made and published and the policies maps for the area. Neighbourhood plans that
have been approved at referendum are also part of the development plan, unless the local
planning authority decides that the neighbourhood plan should not be made.

Disabled people: People have a disability if they have a physical or mental impairment, and
that impairment has a substantial and long-term adverse effect on their ability to carry out
normal day-to-day activities. These persons include, but are not limited to, people with
ambulatory difficulties, blindness, learning difficulties, autism and mental health needs.

Early years: The provision of childcare (including education) for a young child, meaning a
child from birth to the September after the child turns five.

Ecosystem services: Functions of the natural environment, that directly or indirectly provide
benefits for people.

Edge of centre: For retail purposes, a location that is well-connected to, and up to 300
metres from, a primary shopping area (if no primary shopping area has been defined in the
development plan, it should be regarded as a location that is well-connected to, and up to
300 metres from, that part of the town centre within which retail uses predominate –
measured from its outer edge). For all other main town centre uses, a location within 300
metres of a town centre boundary. For office development, this includes locations outside the
town centre but within 500 metres of a public transport interchange. In determining whether a


                                                                                             105
site falls within the definition of edge of centre, account should be taken of local
circumstances.

Electricity network infrastructure: Infrastructure that facilitates the transmission of
electricity from generation sources to end users, including transmission, distribution, and
interconnection. This infrastructure is essential for the operation and expansion of the
electricity network and includes components such as substations, converter stations,
interconnectors, and cables.

Essential local workers: Public sector employees who provide frontline services in areas
including health, education and community safety – such as NHS staff, teachers, police,
firefighters and military personnel, social care and childcare workers.

Freight and logistics: Uses directly associated with the processing, storage, distribution and
transportation of goods, alongside supporting infrastructure. This includes (but is not limited
to) storage and distribution operations, rail freight terminals, intermodal facilities, HGV
operating centres, lorry parking facilities, ports and inland border facilities.

Geodiversity: The range of rocks, minerals, fossils, soils and landforms, together with the
natural processes which form and alter them.

Green infrastructure: A network of multi-functional green and blue spaces and other natural
features, urban and rural, which is capable of delivering a wide range of environmental,
economic, health and wellbeing benefits for nature, climate, local and wider communities and
prosperity. It includes parks and gardens, green spaces, green corridors such as rivers and
canals, sustainable drainage systems, features for species, street trees and community
orchards.

Grey belt: For the purposes of plan-making and decision-making, ‘grey belt’ is defined as
land in the Green Belt comprising previously developed land and/or any other land that, in
either case, does not strongly contribute to any of purposes (a), (b), or (d) in policy GB2.

Gypsies and travellers: Persons of nomadic habit of life whatever their race or origin,
including such persons who on grounds only of their own or their family’s or dependants’
educational or health needs or old age have ceased to travel temporarily or permanently, and
all other persons with a cultural tradition of nomadism or of living in a caravan, but excluding
members of an organised group of travelling showpeople or circus people travelling together
as such.

Habitats site: Any site which would be included within the definition at regulation 8 of the
Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 and also including candidate Special
Areas of Conservation or Special Protection Areas, listed or proposed Ramsar sites, relevant
Marine Sites, and compensatory habitats which relate to these sites70.

Heritage asset: A building, monument, site, place, area or landscape identified as having a
degree of significance meriting consideration in planning decisions, because of its heritage
interest. It includes but is not limited to designated heritage assets and assets identified by
the local planning authority (including local listing).


70 Potential Special Protection Areas, possible Special Areas of Conservation and proposed Ramsar sites are sites on which

the Government has initiated public consultation on the scientific case for designation as a Special Protection Area,
candidate Special Area of Conservation or Ramsar Site.
                                                                                                                        106
Heritage coast: Areas of undeveloped coastline which are managed to conserve their
natural beauty and, where appropriate, to improve accessibility for visitors.

Historic environment: All aspects of the environment resulting from the interaction between
people and places through time, including all surviving physical remains of past human
activity, whether visible, buried or submerged, and landscaped and planted or managed flora.

Historic Environment Record: Information services that seek to provide access to
comprehensive and dynamic resources relating to the historic environment of a defined
geographic area for public benefit and use.

Housing Delivery Test: Measures net homes delivered in a local authority area against the
homes required, using national statistics and local authority data. The Secretary of State will
publish the Housing Delivery Test results for each local authority in England annually.

Integrated Coastal Zone Management: A holistic approach towards the planning and
management of coastal areas (both land and marine), bringing together key interests to
identify suitable approaches to long-term change and adaptation.

International, national and locally designated sites of importance for biodiversity: All
international sites (Special Areas of Conservation, Special Protection Areas, and Ramsar
sites), national sites (Sites of Special Scientific Interest) and locally designated sites including
Local Wildlife Sites.

Irreplaceable habitat: Irreplaceable habitats are habitats with characteristic ecological
features and processes which cannot successfully be created, or would take a very long time
to establish and function normally. Irreplaceable habitats are difficult to recreate due to their
rarity (being endangered or vulnerable to ecosystem collapse), environmental context, or
because they have been established for a very long time (time thresholds may vary). They
generally support important and/or rare species populations or assemblages. They include
ancient woodland, ancient and veteran trees, blanket bog, limestone pavement, sand dunes,
salt marsh and lowland fen.

Large-scale shared living accommodation: Accommodation which provides private rooms
alongside shared communal spaces and facilities. This type of accommodation does not
constitute self-contained dwellings (use class C3), HMOs, student accommodation, hotels, or
other residential institutions.

Local Development Order: An Order made by a local planning authority (under the Town
and Country Planning Act 1990) that grants planning permission for a specific development
proposal or classes of development.

Local housing need: The number of homes identified as being needed through the
application of the standard method set out in Annex D.

Local Nature Recovery Strategies: A system of spatial strategies for nature and
environmental improvement required by law under s.104 of the Environment Act 2021.

Local Nature Reserves: A site managed as a nature reserve under s.21 of the National
Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949 by principal local authorities.


                                                                                                107
Local plan: A plan for the future development of a local area, drawn up by the local planning
authority in consultation with the community.

Local planning authority: The public authority whose duty it is to carry out specific planning
functions for a particular area. All references to local planning authority include the district
council, London borough council, county council, Broads Authority, National Park Authority,
the Mayor of London and a development corporation, to the extent appropriate to their
responsibilities.

Local Wildlife Sites: A term used to describe non-statutory areas identified by local
authorities in the development plan for their biodiversity value. There are a number of
different terms in use locally to describe these sites, including Sites of Importance for Nature
Conservation (SINCs) and Sites of Nature Conservation Importance (SNCIs) and County
Wildlife Sites (CWS).

Main town centre uses: Retail development (including warehouse clubs and factory outlet
centres); leisure, entertainment and more intensive sport and recreation uses (including
cinemas, restaurants, drive-through restaurants, bars and pubs, nightclubs, casinos, health
and fitness centres, indoor bowling centres and bingo halls); banks; professional services;
offices; and arts, culture and tourism development (including theatres, museums, galleries
and concert halls, hotels and conference facilities).

Major development71: For housing, development where 10 or more homes will be provided,
or the site has an area of 0.5 hectares or more. For non-residential development it means
additional floorspace of 1,000m2 or more, or a site of 1 hectare or more, or as otherwise
provided in the Town and Country Planning (Development Management Procedure)
(England) Order 2015.

Major hazard sites, installations and pipelines: Sites and infrastructure, including licensed
explosive sites and nuclear installations, around which Health and Safety Executive (and
Office for Nuclear Regulation) consultation distances to mitigate the consequences to public
safety of major accidents may apply.

Mansard roof: A type of roof that is characterised by two slopes, the lower steep and the
upper shallow. It is generally regarded as a suitable type of roof extension for buildings which
are part of a terrace of at least three buildings and at least two storeys tall, with a parapet
running the entire length of the front façade.

Masterplan: A masterplan is a flexible, placemaking tool, providing a three-dimensional
spatial framework and long-term vision for the development or regeneration of area-specific
or site-specific locations.

Mayoral Development Orders: An Order made by a mayor (under the Town and Country
Planning Act 1990) that grants planning permission for a specific development proposal.

Medium development: A sub-set of major development, comprising housing development
where 10-49 homes (inclusive) will be provided, and the site has an area of up to 2.5
hectares. Policies in this Framework which relate to major development involving the
provision of housing also apply to medium development, whereas policies which apply
exclusively to medium development do not apply to larger scales of development.

71 Other than for the specific purposes of policies N4 and N5.

                                                                                             108
Mineral Consultation Area: A geographical area based on a Mineral Safeguarding Area,
where the district or borough council should consult the mineral planning authority for any
proposals for non-minerals development.

Minerals and waste plans: A plan containing policies on mineral and waste development,
drawn up by the minerals and waste planning authority in consultation with the community.
Minerals and waste matters can be dealt with in separate plans or combined with local plans
where an authority is responsible for all these matters.

Minerals of national and local importance: Critical and growth minerals (as defined in this
glossary) and other minerals which are necessary to meet society’s needs, including
aggregates, brickclay (especially Etruria Marl and fireclay), silica sand (including high grade
silica sands), coal derived fly ash in single use deposits, cement raw materials, gypsum, salt,
fluorspar, oil and gas (including conventional and unconventional hydrocarbons), kaolin, ball
clay, potash, polyhalite and local minerals of importance to heritage assets and local
distinctiveness.

Mineral Safeguarding Area: An area designated by minerals planning authorities which
covers known deposits of minerals which are desired to be kept safeguarded from
unnecessary sterilisation by non-mineral development.

Model Design Codes: Standard design requirements published by the Ministry of Housing,
Communities and Local Government for common development types that can be used and
adopted locally.

National Landscapes: Areas legally designated as areas of outstanding natural beauty
under the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949 and Countryside and
Rights of Way Act 2000.

Natural capital: Stock of natural assets which provide benefits to people in the form of
tangible things which are typically marketed (such as timber, fish stocks, minerals) and less
tangible services (such as air purification, recreational settings and flood prevention).

Natural Flood Management: Managing flood and coastal erosion risk by protecting,
restoring and emulating the natural ‘regulating’ function of catchments, rivers, floodplains and
coasts.

Nature based solutions: Actions which use natural processes to protect, sustainably
manage, and restore natural and modified ecosystems that address societal challenges,
benefiting both people and nature, such as the creation of woodlands or wetlands.

Neighbourhood Development Order: An Order made by a local planning authority (under
the Town and Country Planning Act 1990) through which parish councils and neighbourhood
forums can grant planning permission for a specific development proposal or classes of
development.

Neighbourhood plan: A plan prepared by a parish council or neighbourhood forum for a
designated neighbourhood area. In law this is described as a neighbourhood development
plan in the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004.



                                                                                              109
Net developable area: For the purposes of policy L3, net developable area is the part of a
site that can be developed for housing and directly associated uses, including access roads,
hard landscaping (including footways, paved areas and servicing areas), private gardens,
ground floor private and communal amenity space, ground level parking and incidental open
spaces (including verges and threshold planting). It excludes land that is not suitable for built
development, such as land required for strategic infrastructure, parks and public squares,
and open spaces that deliver benefits as part of the wider green infrastructure network
(including significant onsite biodiversity net gain enhancements and significant sustainable
drainage features).

Older people: People over or approaching retirement age, including the active, newly-retired
through to the very frail elderly; and whose housing needs can encompass accessible,
adaptable general needs housing through to the full range of retirement and specialised
housing for those with support or care needs.

Open space: All open space of public value, including not just land, but also areas of water
(such as rivers, canals, lakes and reservoirs) which offer important opportunities for sport and
recreation and can act as a visual amenity.

Out of centre: A location which is not in or on the edge of a centre but not necessarily
outside the settlement.

Outstanding Universal Value: Cultural and/or natural significance which is so exceptional
as to transcend national boundaries and to be of common importance for present and future
generations. An individual Statement of Outstanding Universal Value is agreed and adopted
by the UNESCO World Heritage Committee for each World Heritage Site.

Permission in principle: A form of planning consent which establishes that a site is suitable
for a specified amount of housing-led development in principle. Following a grant of
permission in principle, the site must receive a grant of technical details consent before
development can proceed.

Pitches and Plots: ‘Pitch’ means a pitch on a gypsy and traveller site and ‘plot’ means a
pitch on a travelling showpeople site (often called a ‘yard’). This terminology differentiates
between residential pitches for gypsies and travellers and mixed-use plots for travelling
showpeople, which may / will need to incorporate space or to be split to allow for the storage
of equipment.

Planning condition: A condition imposed on a grant of planning permission (in accordance
with the Town and Country Planning Act 1990) or a condition included in a Local
Development Order, Mayoral Development Order or Neighbourhood Development Order.

Planning obligation: A legal agreement entered into under section 106 of the Town and
Country Planning Act 1990 to mitigate the impacts of a development proposal.

Playing field: The whole of a site which encompasses at least one playing pitch as defined
in the Town and Country Planning (Development Management Procedure) (England) Order
2015.

Policies Map: A map prepared and maintained by a local planning authority, illustrating
policies across all parts of the development plan.


                                                                                              110
Post-16: Young people who are over compulsory school age but under 19, or aged 19 or
over and for whom an Education, Health and Care (EHC) plan is maintained.

Previously developed land: Land which has been lawfully developed and is or was
occupied by a permanent structure and any fixed surface infrastructure associated with it,
including the curtilage of the developed land (although it should not be assumed that the
whole of the curtilage should be developed). It also includes land comprising large areas of
fixed surface infrastructure such as large areas of hardstanding which have been lawfully
developed. Previously developed land excludes: land that is or was last occupied by
agricultural or forestry buildings; land that has been developed but where provision for
restoration has been made through development management procedures (including
development related to minerals extraction, waste disposal by landfill and renewable and low
carbon energy development, where provision for restoration exists); land in built-up areas
such as residential gardens, parks, recreation grounds and allotments; and land that was
previously developed but where the remains of the permanent structure or fixed surface
structure have blended into the landscape.

Primary shopping area: Defined area where retail development is concentrated.

Priority or threatened species: Species which are particularly vulnerable to the impacts of
development, including but not limited to species contained in the list of species and habitats
of principal importance in England published by the Secretary of State pursuant to section 41
of the Natural Environment and Rural Communities Act 2006, protected species listed in
Schedule 2 and Schedule 5 of the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017,
and species protected by the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981.

Protected Landscapes: Refers to National Parks, the Norfolk and Suffolk Broads and
National Landscapes in England.

Public service infrastructure: Education and healthcare facilities of all types, and facilities
for blue light, social care, library and criminal justice uses.

Ramsar sites: Wetlands of international importance, designated under the 1971 Ramsar
Convention.

Reasonable future scenarios: A range of realistic transport scenarios tested in agreement
with the local planning authority and other relevant bodies (including statutory consultees
where appropriate), to assess potential impacts and determine the optimum transport
infrastructure required to mitigate any adverse impacts, promote sustainable modes of travel
and realise the vision for the site.

Reasonable walking distance: For the purpose of policies S5, L3, GB7 (relating to land
around well-connected stations), this should be considered to be around 800 metres, or
around 10 minutes’ walk time if topography, route availability and quality or physical barriers
would prevent or discourage walking from up to 800 metres away. For the purpose of policy
HC5 (hot food takeaways) it should be considered to be around 400 metres, or around five
minutes’ walk time if topography, route availability and quality or physical barriers would
prevent or discourage walking up to 400 metres. Where a reasonable walking distance is
required to be calculated when applying policies S5(1)(h), L3(2)(c) and GB7(1)(h), and only
part of the site falls within the reasonable walking distance, those sub-paragraphs of policies
S5, L3 and GB7 only apply to the area of the site within that reasonable walking distance.


                                                                                             111
Recycled aggregates: Aggregates resulting from the processing of inorganic materials
previously used in construction, e.g. construction and demolition waste.

Renewable and low carbon energy: Includes energy for heating and cooling as well as
generating electricity. Renewable energy covers those energy flows that occur naturally and
repeatedly in the environment – including from the wind, the fall of water, the movement of
the oceans, from the sun and also from biomass and deep geothermal heat. Low carbon
technologies are those that can help reduce greenhouse gas emissions (compared to
conventional use of fossil fuels). These technologies include, but are not limited to, nuclear
power and supporting infrastructure, low carbon fuels such as biomethane and hydrogen,
heat from recoverable sources (such as heat recovered from data centres), and the storage
of renewable and low carbon energy, including long-duration and short-duration energy
storage such as Battery Energy Storage Systems (BESS).

Repowering: the decommissioning and removal of existing renewable and low carbon
energy infrastructure on-site, and its replacement with newer, larger or more efficient
infrastructure. The repowered site may have a different overall capacity, layout and footprint
from the original project. Repowering may require new associated infrastructure such as new
network connection infrastructure and foundations.

Rural exception sites: Sites used for affordable housing in perpetuity where sites would not
normally be used for housing. Rural exception sites seek to address the needs of the local
community by accommodating households who are either current residents or have an
existing family or employment connection. A proportion of market homes may be allowed on
the site at the local planning authority’s discretion, for example where essential to enable the
delivery of affordable units without grant funding.

Safeguarding zone: An area defined in Circular 01/03: Safeguarding aerodromes, technical
sites and military explosives storage areas, to which specific safeguarding provisions apply.

Secondary aggregates: Aggregates from industrial wastes such as glass (cullet), incinerator
bottom ash, coal derived fly ash, railway ballast, fine ceramic waste (pitcher), and scrap
tyres; and industrial and minerals by-products, notably waste from china clay, coal and slate
extraction and spent foundry sand. These can also include hydraulically bound materials.

Sectoral spatial plans: National or regional plans that focus on the spatial development of
specific types of infrastructure.

Self-build and custom-build housing: Housing built by an individual, a group of individuals,
or persons working with or for them, to be occupied by that individual. Such housing can be
either market or affordable housing. A legal definition, for the purpose of applying the Self-
build and Custom Housebuilding Act 2015 (as amended), is contained in section 1(A1) and
(A2) of that Act.

Setting of a heritage asset: The surroundings in which a heritage asset is experienced. Its
extent is not fixed and may change as the asset and its surroundings evolve. Elements of a
setting may make a positive or negative contribution to the significance of an asset, may
affect the ability to appreciate that significance or may be neutral.

Settlement: Includes cities, towns, villages and other predominantly built-up areas, including
land which is allocated or has permission for development which will form part of the built-up
area once the development is complete. This includes areas defined as a settlement in the
                                                                                             112
development plan (whether using defined settlement boundaries or equivalent terms, or
criteria for identifying settlement extents where boundaries have yet to be defined).
Settlements do not include hamlets and scattered groups of houses located outside
predominantly built-up areas, unless specifically defined as a settlement in the development
plan. For the purpose of this Framework they also exclude villages which lie within and are
defined as part of the Green Belt in the development plan.

Significance (for heritage policy): The value of a heritage asset to this and future
generations because of its heritage interest. The interest may be archaeological,
architectural, artistic or historic. Significance derives not only from a heritage asset’s physical
presence, but also from its setting. For World Heritage Sites, the cultural value described
within each site’s Statement of Outstanding Universal Value forms part of its significance.

Significant observed adverse effect level: This is the level of noise exposure above which
significant adverse effects on health and quality of life occur.

Site investigation information: Includes a risk assessment of land potentially affected by
contamination, or ground stability and slope stability reports, as appropriate. All investigations
of land potentially affected by contamination should be carried out in accordance with
established procedures (such as BS10175 Investigation of Potentially Contaminated Sites –
Code of Practice).

Site of Special Scientific Interest: Sites notified for their flora, fauna or geological,
physiographical or geomorphological features (in England, these sites are notified under s.
28 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981).

Spatial development strategy: A plan containing policies on the development and use of
land on matters of strategic importance to the area prepared by strategic planning authorities
and the Mayor of London.

Special Areas of Conservation: Designated areas which have been given special
protection as important conservation sites (in England, these sites are designated under the
Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017).

Special Protection Areas: Areas classified for being of international importance for the
breeding, feeding, wintering or the migration of rare and vulnerable species of birds (in
England, these sites are classified under the Conservation of Habitats and Species
Regulations 2017).

Specialist community-based accommodation: Includes, but is not limited to,
accommodation for looked after children, supported accommodation for care leavers, and
supervised, non-custodial housing for criminal justice purposes that provide structured
support for individuals charged with or convicted of an offence, transitioning from custody, or
serving community-based sentences.

Strategic environmental assessment: A procedure (set out in the Environmental
Assessment of Plans and Programmes Regulations 2004) which requires the formal
environmental assessment of certain plans and programmes which are likely to have
significant effects on the environment.

Strategic site: A site for residential, commercial or mixed-use development which would be
implemented in multiple phases, have significant infrastructure requirements and require a
                                                                                                113
masterplan. Typically, for a residential-led development, strategic sites would have capacity
for at least 1,500 dwellings (although the scale of residential development can vary
depending on the mix of uses on the site).

Supplementary plans: A type of plan that relevant plan-making authorities can choose to
prepare to set locally-specific design standards or shape and direct site-specific
development. They must undergo consultation and independent examination.

Sustainable drainage system: A sustainable drainage system controls surface water run off
close to where it falls, combining a mixture of built and nature-based techniques to mimic
natural drainage as closely as possible, and accounting for the predicted impacts of climate
change. The type of system that would be appropriate will vary from small scale interventions
such as permeable paving and soakaways that can be used in very small developments to
larger integrated schemes in major developments.

Sustainable transport modes: Any efficient, safe and accessible means of transport with
overall low impact on the environment, including walking, wheeling, cycling and public
transport.

Technical sites: Any area within which is sited or is proposed to be sited equipment for the
provision of air traffic services, as specified in the Town and Country Planning (Safeguarded
Aerodromes, Technical Sites and Military Explosives Storage Areas) Direction 2002.

Town centre: Area defined in the local authority’s policies map in the development plan
including the primary shopping area and areas predominantly occupied by main town centre
uses within or adjacent to the primary shopping area. References to town centres or centres
apply to city centres, town centres, district centres and local centres as defined in the
development plan but exclude small parades of shops of purely neighbourhood significance.
Unless they are identified as centres in the development plan, existing out-of-centre
developments, comprising or, including main town centre uses, do not constitute town
centres.

Transport assessment: A comprehensive and systematic process that considers and sets
out transport issues relating to a proposed development, in the context of the vision for the
scheme. It identifies measures required to support alternatives to the car such as walking,
wheeling, cycling and public transport, and to promote accessibility and safety, together with
measures that will be needed to deal with the anticipated transport impacts of the
development.

Transport statement: A simplified version of a transport assessment where it is agreed the
transport issues arising from development proposals are limited and a full transport
assessment is not required.

Travel plan: A long-term management strategy for an organisation or site that details how
agreed sustainable transport objectives are to be delivered, and which is monitored and
regularly reviewed.

Travellers: Gypsies and travellers, and travelling showpeople.

Travelling showpeople: Members of a group organised for the purposes of holding fairs,
circuses or shows (whether or not travelling together as such). This includes such persons
who on the grounds of their own or their family’s or dependants’ more localised pattern of
                                                                                           114
trading, educational or health needs or old age have ceased to travel temporarily or
permanently, but excludes gypsies and travellers as defined separately in this glossary.

Vision-led approach: An approach to transport planning which sets outcomes for a
development based on achieving well-designed, sustainable, inclusive and popular places,
and provides the transport solutions to deliver those outcomes as opposed to predicting
future demand to provide capacity (often referred to as ‘predict and provide’).

Well-connected station: Railway stations and underground, tram and light rail stops located
within a top 80 Travel to Work Area located partially or fully within England by Gross Value
Added (GVA)72 and which, in the normal weekday timetable, are served (or have a
reasonable prospect of being served due to planned upgrades or through agreement with the
rail operator) throughout the daytime by at least four trains or trams per hour overall, or at
least two trains or trams per hour in any one direction.

Wheeling: The use of wheelchairs, mobility scooters and similar mobility aids as a means of
travel.

Windfall sites: Sites not specifically identified in the development plan.




72 For the purpose of assessing whether Travel to Work Areas fall within this definition, the 2023 GVA data

should continue to be used up to the day after the publication of the 2028 GVA data. For subsequent years, the
GVA data used for the purpose of this definition should continue to be regarded as fixed for each five year
period. Published in:
https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/grossvalueaddedgva/datasets/ukgvaandproductivityestimatesforothergeograp
hies.
                                                                                                              115
Annex C: Information requirements
Policy theme          National decision-         Information requirement (where
                      making policy              applicable under the policies listed)
General decision-     DM1: Preparing             Planning statement setting out:
making                development proposals      • How the development proposal is
                                                    consistent with the relevant
                                                    development plan and national
                                                    decision-making policies;
                                                 • The outcome of any pre-application
                                                    engagement and the extent to which
                                                    the proposal has changed in
                                                    response to it; and
                                                 • The proposed use of any planning
                                                    obligations to make the proposal
                                                    acceptable in planning terms.
Development Viability DM5: Development           There may be circumstances in which
                      Viability                  the submission of a viability assessment
                                                 as part of a development proposal may
                                                 be justified, as set out in policy DM5. In
                                                 such circumstances, the information
                                                 required is a viability assessment
                                                 reflecting policy DM5 and the
                                                 recommended approach in planning
                                                 practice guidance.
Town Centres          TC4: Assessing the       Town centre impact assessment.
                      Impact of development on
                      town centres
Telecommunications    CO2: Supporting            Information on the outcome of pre-
                      information for            submission consultations (in particular
                      telecommunications         with the relevant body).
                      infrastructure proposals
Telecommunications    CO2: Supporting            Evidence that the applicant has sought
                      information for            to keep the number of new sites to a
                      telecommunications         minimum, where a new site is proposed
                      infrastructure proposals   .
Telecommunications    CO2: Supporting            Statement that self-certifies that the
                      information for            cumulative exposure, when operational,
                      telecommunications         will not exceed International
                      infrastructure proposals   Commission guidelines on non-ionising
                                                 radiation protection.
Renewable and low-    W3: Renewable and low      Proposals for decommissioning and site
carbon energy         carbon energy              restoration, including details of how
generation and        development and            these measures are expected to be
electricity network   electricity network        implemented.
infrastructure        infrastructure


                                                                                           116
Policy theme         National decision-         Information requirement (where
                     making policy              applicable under the policies listed)
Transport            TR6: Assessing transport   Transport statement or transport
                     impacts                    assessment (depending on the extent
                                                and significance of the transport issues
                                                involved).
Transport            TR6: Assessing transport Travel plan, indicating how sustainable
                     impacts                  transport objectives will be delivered,
                                              monitored and managed over time.
Sports, Open Space   HC7: Development           Sports, open space and recreation
and Recreation       affecting existing         facilities assessment demonstrating that
Facilities           recreational land and      open space, buildings or land are
                     facilities                 surplus to requirements.
Ground Conditions    P2: Ground conditions      Site investigation information, prepared
                                                by a competent person.
Living conditions and P3: Living conditions and Such information as required to
pollution             pollution                 demonstrate compliance with relevant
                                                aspects of Policy P3.
Flood Risk           F4: Assessing flood risk   Site-specific flood risk assessment
                     for decision-making        appropriate to the scale, nature and
                                                location of development.
Sustainable Drainage F8: Sustainable drainage Statement outlining how the national
Systems (SuDS)       systems and watercourses SuDS standards have been achieved
                                              for development proposals which could
                                              affect drainage on or around the
                                              development site.
Coastal Change       F9: Development in         Coastal change vulnerability
                     Coastal Change             assessment to demonstrate compliance
                     Management Areas           with policy F9, where relevant.
Improving the natural N2: Improving the natural Such information as required to
environment           environment               demonstrate compliance with relevant
                                                aspects of Policy N2.
Protected Landscapes N4: Protected Landscapes Assessment of the effect of major
                                              development proposals.
Heritage             HE5: Assessing effects on Heritage impact assessment.
                     heritage assets           assessment of the significance of the
                                               asset(s) affected (including any
                                               contribution made by their setting) and
                                               of the potential effect(s) of the
                                               proposal(s) on their significance.




                                                                                           117
Annex D: Housing calculations and supply
1. This Annex sets out how housing need should be calculated using the standard method,
   how land supply should be assessed, and the Housing Delivery Test applied. It also sets
   out how a five year supply of traveller sites should be established. It should be read
   alongside Chapter 4 (Achieving Sustainable Development) and Chapter 6 (Delivering A
   Sufficient Supply of Homes), and the Housing Delivery Test Rule Book.

The standard method
2. The standard method calculates a minimum annual local housing need figure as follows:

Step 1: Setting the baseline – 0.8% of existing housing stock for the area

3. Set the baseline using the value of existing housing stock for the area of the local
   authority as set out in the data on Dwelling Stock Estimates data 73, published annually.
   The baseline is 0.8% of the existing housing stock for the area, and the most recent data
   published at the time of the calculation should be used.

Step 2: An adjustment to take account of affordability

4. The housing stock baseline figure (as calculated in step 1) is then adjusted based on the
   affordability of the area.

5. The affordability data used is the median workplace-based affordability ratios, published
   annually by the Office for National Statistics at a local authority level. The mean average
   affordability over the five most recent years for which data is available should be used.

6. No adjustment is applied where the ratio is five or below. For each 1% the ratio is above
   five, the housing stock baseline should be increased by 0.95%. An authority with a ratio of
   10 will have a 95% increase on its annual housing stock baseline.

7. Where an adjustment is to be made, the precise formula is as follows:

    Adjustment Factor = ((five year average affordability ratio-5)/5)×0.95 + 1

Five year housing land supply
8. Local planning authorities should identify and update annually a supply of specific
   deliverable sites. This should be sufficient to provide a minimum of five years’ worth of
   housing, assessed against their housing requirement in the development plan, or against
   their local housing need (calculated using the standard method) where the development
   plan housing requirement is more than five years old.



73 Table 125: dwelling stock estimates by local authority district: Live tables on dwelling stock (including

vacants) - GOV.UK.
                                                                                                               118
9. The supply of specific deliverable sites should include a buffer (moved forward from later
   in the plan period) of:

    a. 5% to ensure choice and competition in the market for land; or

    b. 20% where there has been significant under delivery74 of housing over the previous
       three years, to improve the prospect of achieving the planned supply; or

    c. For the purposes of decision-making only, 20% where a local planning authority has a
       housing requirement adopted in the last five years examined against a version of the
       Framework published prior to December 202475, and whose annual average housing
       requirement76 is 80% or less of the most up-to-date local housing need figure
       calculated using the standard method set out above.

Five year supply of traveller sites
10. Local planning authorities should identify and update annually a supply of specific
    deliverable traveller sites. This should be sufficient to provide a minimum of five years’
    worth of pitches and plots, assessed against their pitch and plot requirement in the
    development plan.

The Housing Delivery Test
11. This measures net homes delivered in a local authority area against the homes required,
    using national statistics and local authority data. The Secretary of State will seek to
    publish the Housing Delivery Test results for each local authority in England annually.

12. Local planning authorities should monitor progress in building out sites which have
    permission. Where the Housing Delivery Test indicates that delivery has fallen below the
    local planning authority’s housing requirement over the previous three years, the following
    policy consequences apply:

    a. Where delivery falls below 95% of the requirement over the previous three years, the
       authority should prepare an action plan to assess the causes of under-delivery and
       identify actions to increase delivery in the future;

    b. Where delivery falls below 85% of the requirement over the previous three years, a
       buffer of 20% should be added to the identified supply of specific deliverable sites.
       This is in addition to the requirement for an action plan;

    c. Where delivery falls below 75% of the requirement over the previous three years, an
       evidenced unmet need for housing is deemed to exist for the purpose of applying


74 This will be measured against the Housing Delivery Test, where this indicates that delivery was below 85% of

the housing requirement.
75 Or the housing requirement is more than five years old and the relevant development plan policies have been

reviewed and found not to require updating.
76 Defined as the total housing requirement, divided by the number of years in the plan period. For joint local

plans, the percentage should be applied in aggregate across the joint local plan area.
                                                                                                           119
       policy S5(1)(j) in this Framework. This is in addition to the requirements for an action
       plan and 20% buffer.

13. The Housing Delivery Test consequences set out above will apply the day following the
    annual publication of the Housing Delivery Test results. At this point they supersede
    previously published results. Until new Housing Delivery Test results are published, the
    previously published result should be used.




                                                                                             120
Annex E: Green Belt assessments
1. Green Belt assessments should:

   a. Identify the location and appropriate scale of the area or areas to be assessed, and in
      doing so:

         i. Consider all Green Belt within the plan area in the first instance;

         ii. Be broadly consistent with any Strategic Green Belt assessment in an adopted
             Spatial Development Strategy;

         iii. Ensure assessment areas are small enough to enable variations in their
              contribution to the Green Belt purposes to be assessed;

         iv. Facilitate identifying areas of grey belt by subdividing areas into smaller
             assessment units where this is necessary; and

         v. Consider where it may be appropriate to vary the size of assessment areas based
            on local circumstances. For example, the assessment of smaller areas may be
            appropriate in certain places, such as around existing settlements or public
            transport hubs or corridors.

   b. Identify areas of grey belt land, as defined in the glossary at Annex B, by evaluating
      the contribution each assessment area makes to Green Belt purposes (a), (b) and (d)
      set out in policy GB2, using the criteria below.

   c. Identify whether the release or development of the assessment area(s) would
      fundamentally undermine the five Green Belt purposes (taken together) of the
      remaining Green Belt when considered across the area of the plan.

2. When making judgements as to whether land is grey belt, authorities should consider the
   contribution that assessment areas make to Green Belt purposes (a), (b) and (d).
   Considerations for informing these judgements are set out below:

Purpose A – to check the unrestricted sprawl of large built-up areas

3. This purpose relates to the sprawl of large built-up areas. Villages should not be
   considered large built-up areas.

Contribution       Illustrative features

Strong             Assessment areas that contribute strongly are likely to be free of
                   existing development, and lack physical feature(s) in reasonable
                   proximity that could restrict and contain development. They are also
                   likely to include all of the following features:
                   • Be adjacent or near to a large built-up area; and
                   • If developed, result in an incongruous pattern of development (such
                       as an extended ‘finger’ of development into the Green Belt).

                                                                                            121
Contribution         Illustrative features

Moderate             Assessment areas that contribute moderately are likely to be adjacent or
                     near to a large built-up area, but include one or more features that
                     weaken the land’s contribution to purpose A, such as (but not limited to):
                     • Having physical feature(s) in reasonable proximity that could restrict
                        and contain development;
                     • Be partially enclosed by existing development, such that new
                        development would not result in an incongruous pattern of
                        development;
                     • Contain existing development; and/or
                     • Being subject to other urbanising influences.

Weak or              Assessment areas that make only a weak or no contribution are likely to
None                 include those that:
                     • Are not adjacent to or near to a large built-up area; or
                     • Are adjacent to or near to a large built-up area, but containing or
                         being largely enclosed by significant existing development.


Purpose B – to prevent neighbouring towns merging into one another

4. This purpose relates to the merging of towns77, not villages.

Contribution         Illustrative Features

Strong               Assessment areas that contribute strongly are likely to be free of
                     existing development and include all of the following features:
                     • Forming a substantial part of a gap between towns; and
                     • If developed, would be likely to result in the loss of visual separation
                        of towns.

Moderate             Assessment areas that contribute moderately are likely to be located in
                     a gap between towns, but include one or more features that weaken
                     their contribution to this purpose, such as (but not limited to):
                     • Forming a small part of the gap between towns; and/or
                     • Being able to be developed without the loss of visual separation
                        between towns. This could be (but is not limited to) due to the
                        presence or the close proximity of structures, natural landscape
                        elements or topography that preserve visual separation.

Weak or              Assessment areas that contribute weakly are likely to include those that:
None                 • Do not form part of a gap between towns; or
                     • Form part of a gap between towns, but only a very small part of this
                        gap, without making a contribution to visual separation.




77 For this purpose ‘towns’ includes cities.

                                                                                                  122
Purpose D – to preserve the setting and special character of historic towns

5. This purpose relates to historic towns, not villages. Where there are no historic towns in
   the plan area, it may not be necessary to provide detailed assessments against this
   purpose.

Contribution     Illustrative Features

Strong           Assessment areas that contribute strongly are likely be free of existing
                 development and to include all of the following features:
                 • Form part of the setting of the historic town; and
                 • Make a considerable contribution to the special character of a
                    historic town. This could be (but is not limited to) as a result of being
                    within, adjacent to, or of significant visual importance to the historic
                    aspects of the town.

Moderate         Assessment areas that perform moderately are likely to form part of the
                 setting and/or contribute to the special character of a historic town, but
                 include one or more features that weaken their contribution to this
                 purpose, such as (but not limited to):
                 • Being separated to some extent from historic aspects of the town by
                     existing development or topography;
                 • Containing existing development; and/or
                 • Not having an important visual, physical or experiential relationship
                     to historic aspects of the town.

Weak or          Assessment areas that make no or only a weak contribution are likely to
None             include those that:
                 • Do not form part of the setting of a historic town; or
                 • Have no visual, physical, or experiential connection to the historic
                     aspects of the town.




                                                                                                123
Annex F: Managing Flood Risk and Coastal
Change
Table 1: Flood zones (risks from river and sea flooding)

Flood Zone     Definition

Zone 1         Land having a less than 0.1% annual probability of river or sea flooding
               (all land outside Zones 2, 3a and 3b).
Low
probability

Zone 2         Land having between a 1% and 0.1% annual probability of river flooding;
               or land having between a 0.5% and 0.1% annual probability of sea
Medium
               flooding (land shown in light blue on the Flood Map for Planning).
probability

Zone 3a        Land having a 1% or greater annual probability of river flooding; or Land
               having a 0.5% or greater annual probability of sea flooding (land shown in
High
               dark blue on the Flood Map for Planning).
probability

Zone 3b        This zone comprises land where water from rivers or the sea has to flow or
               be stored in times of flood. The identification of functional floodplain should
Functional
               take account of local circumstances and not be defined solely on rigid
floodplain
               probability parameters. Functional floodplain will normally comprise:
               •   Land having a 3.3% or greater annual probability of flooding, with any
                   existing flood risk management infrastructure operating effectively; or
               •   Land that is designed to flood (such as a flood attenuation scheme),
                   even if it would only flood in more extreme events (such as 0.1%
                   annual probability of flooding).

               Local planning authorities should identify in their strategic flood risk
               assessments areas of functional floodplain and their boundaries
               accordingly, in agreement with the Environment Agency (not separately
               distinguished from Zone 3a on the Flood Map).


Note: Flood Zones 2 and 3, shown on the Environment Agency’s Flood Map for Planning,
only account for river and sea flooding, and do not account for the benefits of flood defences
or the possible effects of climate change. Reference should therefore also be made to the
Environment Agency's other data on the Flood Map for Planning, and any current strategic
flood risk assessment(s), when considering potential future flood risks to developments and
land uses.




                                                                                             124
Table 2: Flood risk vulnerability classification

ESSENTIAL INFRASTRUCTURE
•   Essential transport infrastructure (including mass evacuation routes) which has to cross
    the area at risk.
•   Essential utility infrastructure which has to be located in a flood risk area for operational
    reasons, including for electricity generation and storage, electricity network infrastructure,
    telecommunications infrastructure, water supply reservoirs and water treatment works
    that need to remain operational in times of flood.
•   Wind turbines.
•   Solar farms.
•   Hydrogen production facilities.
•   Carbon Capture, distribution and storage facilities.
•   Heat networks.
•   Data Centres.
•   Electric vehicle charging stations.

HIGHLY VULNERABLE
•   Police and ambulance stations, fire stations and command centres.
•   Emergency dispersal points.
•   Basement dwellings.
•   Caravans, mobile homes and park homes intended for permanent residential use.
•   Installations requiring hazardous substances consent or which fall under The Control of
    Major Accident Hazards Regulations 2015. Where there is a demonstrable need for such
    installations – including bulk storage associated with port or similar facilities, and energy
    infrastructure and carbon capture or storage – to be located at coastal, water-side, or
    other high flood risk areas, they should be classified as ‘Essential Infrastructure’.
•   Installations requiring a radioactive substances regulations permit for disposal to landfill or
    dedicated near-surface disposal by burial.

MORE VULNERABLE
•   Hospitals.
•   Residential institutions such as residential care homes, children’s homes, social services
    homes, prisons and hostels.
•   Buildings used for dwelling houses (including floating/rising designs), student halls of
    residence, drinking establishments, nightclubs and hotels.
•   Non–residential uses for health services, nurseries and educational establishments.




                                                                                               125
•   Landfill78 and sites used for waste management facilities for hazardous waste.
•   Sites used for holiday or short-let caravans and camping, subject to a specific warning
    and evacuation plan.

LESS VULNERABLE
•   Police, ambulance and fire stations which are not required to be operational during
    flooding.
•   Buildings used for: shops; financial, professional and other services; restaurants, cafes
    and hot food takeaways; offices; general industry, storage and distribution; non-residential
    institutions not included in the ‘more vulnerable’ class; and assembly and leisure.
•   Land and buildings used for agriculture and forestry.
•   Waste treatment (except landfill and hazardous waste facilities).
•   Minerals working and processing (except for sand and gravel working).
•   Water treatment works which do not need to remain operational during times of flood.
•   Sewage treatment works, if adequate measures to control pollution and manage sewage
    during flooding events are in place.
•   Car parks.
•   Land-raising (unless part of or enabling a development with a higher vulnerability
    classification).

WATER-COMPATIBLE DEVELOPMENT
•   Flood control infrastructure.
•   Water transmission infrastructure and pumping stations.
•   Sewage transmission infrastructure and pumping stations.
•   Sand and gravel working.
•   Docks, marinas and wharves.
•   Navigation facilities.
•   Ministry of Defence installations.
•   Ship building, repairing and dismantling, dockside fish processing and refrigeration and
    compatible activities requiring a waterside location.
•   Water-based recreation (excluding sleeping accommodation).
•   Lifeguard and coastguard stations.
•   Amenity open space, nature conservation and biodiversity, outdoor sports and recreation
    and essential facilities such as changing rooms.



78 Landfill in this annex is as defined in Schedule 10 of the Environmental Permitting (England and Wales)

Regulations 2010: The Environmental Permitting (England and Wales) Regulations 2010.

                                                                                                             126
•   Essential ancillary sleeping or residential accommodation for staff required by uses in this
    category, subject to a specific warning and evacuation plan.




                                                                                             127
Table 3: Flood risk vulnerability and flood zone ‘incompatibility’

Flood                              Flood Risk Vulnerability Classification
zones

                   Essential          Highly           More            Less        Water
                 infrastructure     vulnerable       vulnerable     vulnerable   compatible


Zone 1                 ✓                ✓                ✓              ✓            ✓



Zone 2                 ✓          Exception test         ✓              ✓            ✓
                                  required


Zone 3a †        Exception test         X          Exception test       ✓            ✓
                 required †                        required


Zone 3b *        Exception test         X                X              X           ✓*
                 required *


Key:

✓ Exception test is not required

X Development should be refused

Notes to table 3:

Some developments may contain different elements of vulnerability, and the highest
vulnerability category should be used, unless the development is considered in its
component parts.

† In flood zone 3a essential infrastructure should be designed and constructed to remain
  operational and safe in times of flood.

*   In flood zone 3b (functional floodplain) essential infrastructure that has passed the
    exception test, and water-compatible uses, should be designed and constructed to:
    •   remain operational and safe for users in times of flood;
    •   result in no net loss of floodplain storage;
    •   not impede water flows and not increase flood risk elsewhere.




                                                                                              128
